Case Report

Clinical Genetics 1990: 38: 469473

Diagnosis of familial amyloidotic
polyneuropathy in France
F. SATIERI, W. C. NICHOLS
* AND M. D. BENSON'
'Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, St Quentin Hospital, France and 'Department
of Medicine and Medical Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, USA
Two cases of familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP) in a French family are reported.
Clinical onset was in the fifth and sixth decades with decreased sensation in the lower limbs
followed by involvement of the upper extremities. Motor changes appeared later and evolved
to restrict ambularion. Cardiac involvement with congestive heart failure and arrhythmias was
the cause of death. DNA analysis was performed on ten members of this family. Restriction
enzyme analysis of amplification products of exons 2, 3 and 4 of the prealbumin gene were
negative for the methionine-30, alanine-60 and serine-84 mutations but positive for the tyrosine77 mutation. The tyrosine-77 prealbumin mutation was first described in a family from Illinois
with origin in Germany. The discovery of the tyrosine-77 gene in the family from Picardy may
help to determine the origin of this disease and tell us if one mutation has been spread around
the world, as we suspect, with many kindreds having the methionine-30 gene, or whether there
have been separate spontaneous mutational events, perhaps a peculiarity of this site in the
prealbumin gene.
Received 10 Ocrobcr 1989, revised 25 May, accepred for publicarion 23 June 1990
Key words: familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy; restriction analysis of amplified DNA; Tyr77 mutation.

Hereditary amyloidosis is an autosomal
dominant disease characterized by high penetrance but late onset. The disease results
from a progressive extracellular deposition
of amyloid protein (mostly perivascular) in
many organs and prominently in the peripheral nervous system (Benson & Wallace
1989).
Four members of a family (three brothers
and a cousin) were affected by familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP) (Satier
1989). Two of them were evaluated clinically
and the diagnosis was confirmed by biopsy.
The two others were presumed to have the
disease on the basis of clinical findings, but
no biopsies were done.
The family is French, and has been living

in Picardy for many generations. Genomic
DNA of members of this family was analyzed to determine if this family has one of
the known mutations of prealbumin associated with hereditary amyloidosis.

Case Reports
Case

I

Mr. T... Jacques, a retired French policeman,
was born in 1924 in Beaurevoir. All of his
family live in Picardy. He had no medical illness until age 56 when he developed sexual
impotence. Three years later, the patient had
gait disturbances which gradually worsened.
He also noted paresthesiae in his feet and

470

SATIER E T AL.

legs. Subsequently, weakness and sensory
loss in the lower limbs resulted in falls.
When admitted to the hospital, he weighed
76 kg and his height was 169 cm. His blood
pressure was 130/70 mm Hg. His pulse was
90/min. Neurologically, there was muscle
weakness distally in the lower and upper extremities. He was ataxic. The cranial nerves
were normal. All deep reflexes were absent.
Plantar reflexes were unresponsive. Sensory
modalities were decreased in the distal portions of the extremities. Biopsies of muscle
and of superficial peroneal nerve were nondiagnostic. The electromyogram (EMG)
showed markedly decreased nerve conduction velocities. A head CT was normal. The
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was normal. The
chest roentgenogram was within normal limits. The electrocardiogram showed a left
bundle branch block. Tests for serum and
urine monoclonal protein were negative.

Blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation
rate and urine analysis were normal. Serum
chemistry revealed no abnormalities.
Four years later at age 63, Mr. T... was admitted to the hospital for severe congestive
heart failure. Echocardiography showed
concentric hypertrophy of the right and left
ventricles consistent with restrictive cardiomyopathy. A rectal biopsy was negative for
amyloid, but a muscle biopsy showed perivascular deposition of amyloid when stained
with Congo red. Treatment with dimethylsulfoxide was started but discontinued because of development of hepatitis.
One year later, Mr. T... was again admitted to the hospital for congestive heart failure. He suffered a cardiac arrest and was
admitted to the intensive care unit. At that
time, he had signs of severe congestive heart
failure, periorbital purpura, complete paralysis of the lower and upper limbs, a loss in

Y

I

11

“1

0

presunnd amyloidostS

Fig. 1. Pedigree of French family with hereditary amyloidosis. Generation numbers (Roman numerals) are to
the left and individuals numbers are beneath each symbol. The propositus (IV-12) is indicated by the star. Plus
symbol indicates gene carrier.

F A M I L I A L A M Y LO1 D O T l C

all sensory modalities, severe muscle atrophy in the extremities and absent deep tendon reflexes. Cranial nerve functions were
normal.
In June 1989, at age 65, the patient died
from cardiac arrhythmia.
Case 2

Mr. T. Marcel was born in 1910. He was a
cousin of Case 1 (Fig. 1). He gave a history
of high blood pressure, moderate heart failure treated by Digoxin and peripheral
neuropathy of unknown etiology.
At age 72, Mr. T. Marcel was admitted
to the hospital for congestive heart failure.
He gave a history of paresthesiae in his extremities of 2 years’ duration and not walking for 1 month. He had many episodes of

v12
v9
v25
VS
v7
v27
v24
v10
IVS
IVl2

Fig. 2. Electrophoresis of PCR products. Ssp I digest
of the exon 3 containing amplification product for the
detection of tyrosine-77 prealbumin gene. Lanes 1-10
are exon 3 amplification products of the individuals
listed in the pedigree. Individuals V12, V27. V24, V10,
and IV5 are not carriers for the tyrosine-77 gene and
have only the 268 bp product. Individuals V9. V25, V8.
V7 and IV12 are carriers of the tyrosine-77 gene and
show 140 bp and 128 bp fragments as well as the 268
bp product from the normal allele. The right hand lane
has the 1 kb ladder (BRL) standards, Fragments were
separated by agarose gel electrophoresis and visualized by ethydium bromide staining. Fragment sizes
are indicated in base pairs.

P O LY N E U R O P A T H Y

47 1

diarrhea. On examination there was paresis
of all extremities with muscle loss in the
legs and hands. Fasciculations were noted in
shoulder girdle muscles. Deep tendon reflexes were absent and plantar reflexes were
unresponsive. The cranial nerves were normal. Light touch and temperature sensations were diminished in all extremities.
There was an eschar on the right heel. His
blood pressure was 140/80 mm Hg; and his
pulse 88/min. He weighed 77 kg.
The electrocardiogram showed: decreased
voltage, atrial fibrillation, left ventricular
hypertrophy, a partial left bundle branch
block and ventricular extrasystoles. Chest
roentgenogram showed cardiac enlargement
and bilateral pleural effusions. The electromyogram revealed neurogenic changes and
decreased nerve conduction velocities.
Echocardiography sevealed symmetric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Blood cell
count and urine analysis were normal. A 24
h urine collection showed no increase in
protein excretion.
At age 73, after episodes of hematuria,
bladder biopsies showed an endothelial carcinoma which was treated with resection
and local chemotherapy. One year later, the
patient was again admitted to hospital in
a cachectic state. A skin biopsy from the
abdominal wall showed deposition of amyloid. Funduscopic examination showed no
vitreous opacity. The patient died a few
months later of heart failure and electrolyte
abnormalities caused by diarrhea. At autopsy, amyloid deposits were found in the
digestive tract, heart, spleen, tongue and
liver.
Material and Methods

Amplification of Total Genomic D N A
Approximately, 1 pg genomic DNA was
amplified using a GeneAmp DNA amplification kit (Perkin Elmer Cetus) and one of
two sets of 30 base primers flanking pre-

472

SATIER ET AL.

albumin gene regions containing either exon
2 or 3. The lengths of the amplified regions
for exons 2 and 3 were 215 bp and 268 bp,
respectively. All components, except the Taq
polymerase, were added to a 500 p1 microcentrifuge tube, in a total volume of 100 p1.
The mix was heated to 95" C for 5 min to
denature any proteases which may have
been isolated with the genomic DNA. Taq
polymerase (2.5 units) was added, mineral
oil (100 pl, Sigma) was layered over the top
and 30 cycles of amplification were performed using a Perkin Elmer DNA Thermar
Cycler. Amplification conditions were 1 min
of denaturing at 95"C, 2 min of annealing
at 65°C and 3 min of elongation at 72°C.
The last elongation step was performed for
8 min. After amplification, the samples were
extracted 1X with Sevag (241 Ch:oroform:
isoamyl alcohol) to remove the aqueous
from the oil and then extracted 1X aach
with TE-saturated phenol and Sevag. Amplification products were precipitated with
10 M ammonium acetate and 100% ethanol
and redissolved in 50 pl 1X TE.
Restriction Analysis of Amplijicntion Products
Approximately one-tenth of each amplified
sample was subjected to digestion with the
appropriate restriction endonuclease in a
total volume of 1Op1.Testing for Portuguese/
Japanese/Swedish (Type I, Met-30) was performed using exon 2 amplification products
and 10 units NsiI (BRL). Tests for Appalachian (Ala-60), Illinois/German (Tyr-77) or
Indiana/Swiss (Type 11, Ser-84) were performed using exon 3 amplification products
and 10 units Pvu I1 (BRL), Ssp I (NEB) or
Alu I (NEB), respectively. All digestions were
done at 37°C for 2 h. One p1 of loading dye
was added to each and the digested amplification products were electrophoresed
through a 4% composite (3% FMC Nusieve,
1% BRL) agarose gel until the bromophenol
blue dye front had migrated to the bottom

of the gel. The gels were stained in ethidium
bromide (1 pg/ml) and the digested amplification products visualized using an UV light
source. A permanent record was made using
Polaroid 6000 B/W film.
Results

Incubation of the exon 2 amplification products with Nsi I gave no evidence of digestion.
Similarly, no digestion of the exon 3 amplification product was seen with Pvu 11. Alu I
gave a single cleavage of the exon 3 product
as seen in normal prealbumin. Ssp I, however, digested the exon 3 product to give the
pattern seen with the Tyr-77 amyloidosis
gene. The unique Ssp I site produced by the
point mutation is very close to the middle of
the 268 bp amplification product. Tyrosine77 gene carriers show bands of 140 bp and
128 bp resulting from digestion of the variant
exon 3 containing amplification product as
well as the undigested 268 bp containing the
normal exon 3 fragment of the heterozygous
carrier (Fig. 2).
Dlscusslon

Numerous kindreds with hereditary amyloidosis have been described since the original
report in 1952 of the Portuguese disease (Andrade 1952). Most syndromes present as a
sensorimotor neuropathy and have been
called familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy
(FAP). In the last 10 years most of the recognized FAP syndromes have been found to be
associated with single amino acid variants of
plasma prealbumin (transthyretin), which is
the protein that accumulates in the amyloid
deposits. To date, 7 different amyloid associated mutations (methionine-30, isoleucine33, alanine-60, tyrosine-77, serine-84, methionine-1 1, isoleucine- 122) have been found in
this 127 amino acid protein. DNA tests,
based on Southern analysis using prealbumin cDNA or genomic DNA probes, have

FA M I L I A L A M Y L O I D O T I C P O LY N E U R 0 P A T H Y

been developed for each of these mutations
and used to detect carriers of the variant
genes. More recently restriction analysis of
amplified segments of the prealbumin gene
has been used instead of Southern analysis
which requires hybridization with radioactive probes (Nichols’& Benson 1990). Using
the technique of polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), we have been able to test more rapidly for each of the mutations that were
shown to be diagnostic by Southern analysis.
Thus the PCR technique was used to analyze
DNA from the propositus of this French
family and screen for the four most common
prealbumin variants.
The lack of digestion of the exon 2 PCR
product by NsiI and the exon 3 product by
Pvu I1 and Alu I essentially excludes the
presence of the Met-30, Ala-60 and Ser-84
mutations. The Ssp I digestion, however,
confirmed the presence of the Tyr-77 prcalbumin mutation in the propositus and
identified 3 non-affected gene carriers.
The amyloidosis syndrome in the present
family is very similar to the original description with relatively late-onset peripheral
neuropathy presenting as typical FAP type I
(lower extremity sensorimotor neuropathy.
diarrhea and orthostatis) (Wallace et al.
1988). Cardiomyopathy was also a feature
of the first kindred described. Since then,
two other families with the Tyr-77 gene have
been found, each with late-onset disease
characterized by Type I neuropathy and cardiomyopathy (unpublished data). Each of
these families is in the United States and
each is of European extraction. The original
kindred with Tyr-77 is German (Prussia or
Lithuania). Another family has French Huguenot ancestors but the genealogy is too
complex to determine if the gene came from
the French branch of the family. Discovery
of the Tyr-77 gene in the family from Picardy may help determine the origin of this
disease if a single mutation occurred and
was spread throughout the world. Recently,

473

multiple mutational events have been postulated for the Met-30 prealbumin gene, based
on haplotype analysis and the fact that codon 30 could undergo a cytosine to thymine
mutation related to the CpG dinucleotide
sequence (Yoshioka et al. 1989). No such
prediction can be made for codon 77 because the CpG dinucleotide sequence does
not occur in either the positive or negative
strand at this position. Even so, the increasing number of unrelated families with Tyr77 prealbumin may represent a different
susceptibility for mutation at this site.
Haplotype analysis of the different kindreds
may help answer this question.
References

Andrade, C. (1952). A peculiar form of peripheral
neuropathy. Familial atypical generalized amyIoidosis with special involvement of the peripheral nerves, Brain 75, 408.
Benson, M. D. & M. R. Wallace (1989) Amyloidosis. In The Metabolic Basis of Inherited
Disease. 6th Edit. C. R. Scriver, A. L. Beaudet,
W. S. Sly & D. Valle (eds). New York, McGraw
Hill Book Co., pp. 2439-2460.
Nichols, W. C. €2 M. D. Benson (1990). Hereditary amyloidosis: detection of variant prealbumin genes by restriction enzyme analysis of
amplified genomic DNA sequences. Clin.
Genet. 37, 44-.
Satier, F. (1989). Thesis: Etude clinique et biochimique d’une famille Picarde atteinte d’amylose hereditaire. Universite de Picardie, Facultk
de Mtdecine d’Amicns.
Wallace, M. R., F. E. Dwulet, E. C. Williams, P.
M. Coiineally & M. D. Benson (1988). Identification of a new hereditary amyloid prealbumin
variant, Tyr-77, associated with autosomal
dominant amyloidosis. J . Clin. Invest. 81, 189.
Yoshioka, K., H. Furuya, H. Sasaki, M. Saraiva,
P. Costa & Y. Sakaki (1989). Haplotype analysis of familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy.
Hum. Genet. 82, 9-1 3.
Address:
Dr. France Satier
BP 20
F-80 190 Nesle
France

