Brain (1977), 100,755-773

by WILLIAM C. SCHOENE, STIRLING CARPENTER,
PETER O. BEHAN and NORMAN GESCHWIND
(From the Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), Peter Bent Brigham Hospital—Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA)
INTRODUCTION

M U L T I P L E SCLEROSIS, pathologically, is characterized by disseminated plaques
of demyelination limited to the central nervous system. There are, however, a few
cases in the literature which combine the features of multiple sclerosis and peripheral
neuropathy (Wartenberg, 1958). Clinically, they usually show signs of a polyneuritis or mononeuritis in association with signs of disordered function of more
than one part of the central nervous system, for example, the pyramidal and
cerebellar pathways. The pathological state of the peripheral nervous system in
these patients has not been well described, although a non-specific interstitial
radiculitis and/or neuritis has occasionally been mentioned.
Our attention was drawn to the association of multiple sclerosis and hypertrophic
neuropathy by a recent case in which both disorders were found at post-mortem
examination. We shall report this case (Case 1) as well as additional cases (Cases 2
and 3) of this association. In addition, we shall describe 'onion bulb' formations
located in the central nervous system within multiple sclerosis plaques in 2 cases
(Cases 1 and 4).
Review of the literature has disclosed 7 other pathologically verified cases of
multiple sclerosis associated with hypertrophic or 'onion bulb' neuropathy
(Denkler, 1904; Schob, 1907, 1912, 1923; Ketelaer, Leruitte and Perier, 1966;
Ninfo, Rizzuto and Terzian, 1967; and Jellinger, 1969). These cases are summarized
in the Appendix.
METHODS AND MATERIALS
The available clinical records were reviewed. Neuropathological examination in Case 1 included
paraffin blocks of the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS) (proximal
and distal), optic nerves and muscle. All sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin and selected

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN THE
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS
SYSTEM IN ASSOCIATION WITH MULTIPLE
SCLEROSIS AND HYPERTROPHIC
POLYNEUROPATHY

756

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS

sections with special stains. Serial sections were cut through several plaques of demyelination from
the mesencephalon and spinal cord containing 'onion bulb' formations. Material for electron microscopy
was taken at autopsy from the brain, spinal cord and peripheral nerves, fixed in glutaraldehyde and
osmium tetroxide and then stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate.
Cases 2, 3 and 4 were studied with paraffin blocks and stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Selected
sections were stained with luxol fast blue—PAS, Bodian and Woelke myelin methods. Routine sampling
of the viscera was made.

Hospital course. During the first three days, the patient had increasing difficulty in swallowing and
breathing. Numbness developed in the right upper gum and lip and the left corneal reflex disappeared.
Visual acuity became considerably reduced in the left eye, and both pupils became dilated and fixed.
There was also paralysis of accommodation. Ocular movements mediated by the third nerve were not
affected. Proximal weakness was found in the arms and legs, and the tendon reflexes were absent in the
legs. After tracheostomy, the patient was given respiratory assistance.
On the fourth and fifth days, strength diminished rapidly in all limbs and the sternomastoid muscles,
and the tendon reflexes could not be elicited. An indwelling catheter was necessary because of urinary
retention. Left facial weakness now appeared. Tachycardia and hypertension developed and continued
throughout the time he was on the respirator. By the eighth day, sensory loss of all modalities had
developed below the T1-T2 level.
By the twelfth day, the sixth nerve pareses had improved, and the pupils returned to normal size and
reactivity. Concomitantly, he developed dysfunction of the extra-ocular components of the third nerves
bilaterally, despite the other signs of improvement. On the fifteenth day, his condition again worsened.
His right eye went blind. Neural hearing loss became apparent, and the facial weakness, which had
improved, got worse. Consciousness and intellectual function remained intact until the seventeenth day
when brief episodes of turning the head and the eyes to the left occurred, and the patient became increasingly confused. On the twenty-third day, he was almost completely blind and deaf. The level of
consciousness declined further, and some decerebrate movements were seen in response to pain. Tendon
reflexes were absent. Despite the general deterioration, the extra-ocular paralyses remitted and eye
movements became full. The condition remained stable until the forty-second day when there was
improvement in hearing, vision and mental state. The sensory level was now below L3-4. By the fortyfourth day he was orientated, could read large print and had some voluntary movements in the arms
and legs. On the sixty-second day he was first able to breathe on command. Despite a normal state
of consciousness, decerebrate movements still appeared in response to stimulation. By the sixty-eighth
day, he was almost weaned from the respirator. He could now read ordinary print. The arms, though
weak, were much stronger than the legs and bladder function returned.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

Case 1 (WRVAH A71-63)
Clinical history. A 33-year-old white physician was admitted to University Hospital, Boston, because
of diplopia and difficulty in urination. Approximately three weeks before admission, the patient's
children had an influenza-like illness. A few days later, the patient developed pain behind the eyes and
fever of 102° F. Twelve days before admission, right orchitis appeared. Five days later, he was stung
on the heel by a bee. Three days before admission, he developed blurring of vision in the left eye; on
the following day diplopia appeared, most marked on looking to the left. One day before admission, he
had difficulty in starting urination.
Past history included mumps and the usual childhood illnesses. He was allergic to penicillin, sulpha
compounds and photographic developers.
Family history included a brother who had had multiple sclerosis for more than thirty years.
On admission, the patient had normal vital signs. The fundi were normal, but visual acuity in the left
eye was 20/50 and there was a left paracentral scotoma. There was weakness of abduction of both eyes,
more marked on the left. Speech was mildly slurred and respiration laboured. His gait was unsteady and
the bladder was distended. The remainder of the examination was normal.

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

757

Laboratory investigations. Lumbar puncture on admission showed normal pressure, normal sugar,
protein of 112 mg per cent and 94 white cells (64 per cent polymorphs). Leucocytosis appeared in the
blood and persisted during the period the patient was on the respirator. Other laboratory findings
were normal. Subsequent lumbar punctures showed decreasing numbers of white cells and a rise of
protein. By the seventeenth day there were 7 lymphocytes and a protein of 170 mg per cent. On the fortieth
day the protein was 600 mg per cent rising to 1290 mg per cent on the forty-fourth day. By the third
month, the protein had risen to 1580 mg per cent after which it began to decline. Gamma globulin never
exceeded 3 per cent of the total CSF protein, and protein electrophoresis was interpreted as normal.
On the twenty-third day, nerve conduction studies showed velocities of 68 ms" 1 (normal ^ 50 ms-1)
in the ulnar and median nerves of both arms and 32-29 ms" 1 (normal 3= 40 ms"') in the legs, with normal
insertional activity and without fibrillations.
Immunological studies. Peripheral blood lymphocytes were tested in vitro for sensitivity to CNS
myelin basic protein and peripheral nerve antigen. Stimulation indices were 3-2 for CNS basic protein
and 4 0 for peripheral nerve antigen. Both these values are outside the normal range and point to
sensitivity to both CNS and PNS antigen.
Pathology. General post-mortem examination showed emaciation, bronchopneumonia, adenocarcinoma (3 cm in diameter) replacing the pole of the left kidney, generalized atherosclerosis and
flexion contractures.
The brain weighed 1320 g, appeared to be well formed and was covered by clear meninges. The pons
and medulla were small. The circle of Willis showed slight atherosclerosis. Cranial nerves three to twelve
bilaterally were enormously enlarged (fig. 1). The initial millimetre or so of each nerve adjacent to the
brain-stem appeared slightly less enlarged. There were numerous grey plaques scattered throughout
the cerebrum (fig. 2), cerebellum and brain-stem. Occasional small plaques were somewhat laminated
in appearance and had a blood vessel in their centre.
The entire spinal cord was small and all anterior and posterior nerve roots were extraordinarily
thickened and nodular (figs. 3 and 4). In the cervical region, the posterior roots were slightly larger than
the anterior. The thickest roots were in the lumbar and sacral regions where the anterior and posterior
roots were approximately the same size. There was less enlargement in the first millimetre of the spinal
root adjacent to the spinal cord. The entire cord had a grey appearance and there was loss of definition
between grey and white matter. Minute focal haemorrhages were present in some of the anterior horns.
The peripheral nerves, including the brachial plexus, sciatic, popliteal and sural nerves, were of normal
size and appearance. All muscles examined were somewhat reduced in mass.
Microscopic studies of the cerebral hemispheres, brain-stem and cerebellum showed disseminated
lesions typical of multiple sclerosis, characterized by sharp lines of demyelination with relative preservation of axons. Macrophages were seen in some of the demyelinated regions. There was a band of round

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

He was transferred to the rehabilitation unit where slight improvement occurred over the next few
months. His intellect appeared normal; he was able to read and even dictated several professional
articles. Although his speech was somewhat dysarthric, he conversed well. The optic discs were pale.
Eye movements were full. There was mild bilateral facial weakness and mild pseudo-bulbar abnormality
of emotional expression. The arms were hypotonic with distal weakness of the hands and absent reflexes.
The lower extremities were spastic with limited movements, hyperactive reflexes and extensor plantar
responses. There was decreased perception of pin-prick from the knees down and decreased vibration
sense in the hands and feet.
Fifteen months after the onset of the illness the patient was transferred to the West Roxbury
Veterans Administration Hospital Spinal Cord Injury Unit. Initially, he appeared to recover, but he
relapsed during the next several months, and continued to deteriorate over the next few years. Nystagmus
was present on right and left lateral gaze. Speech was slow and unintelligible, and swallowing was poor.
Pseudo-bulbar affect became more prominent, and the patient showed a decline in intellect. Sphincter
control was impaired. He died five years after the onset of his symptoms.

758

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS

cells at the edges of some of the plaques and in others perivascular inflammatory infiltrate. Rosenthal
fibres were found in several plaques in the mesencephalon and medulla. Fibrillary astrocytosis and, in
some regions, gemistocytic astrocytes were present in and hear many plaques. One optic nerve showed
demyelination. Most of the medulla and all of the spinal cord was demyelinated.
All the anterior and posterior spinal nerve roots, the proximal parts of the peripheral nerves and third
to twelfth cranial nerves were extensively involved with classic 'onion bulb' formations (fig. 5). These
consisted of a whorled pattern of cells and fibrosis arranged around generally thin myelinated axons.

FIG. 2. (Case /) Cerebral hemispheres with periventricular multiple sclerosis plaques.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

FIG. 1. (Case 1) Massively enlarged cranial nerve roots.

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

fiSB

FIG. 4. (Case 1) Cauda equina. close-up of spinal root hypertrophy.

FIG. 5. (Case i) Spinal root, 'onion bulb' formation, domori trichrome.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

FIG. 3. (Case 1) Extraordinary hypertrophy of all spinal nerve roots.

760

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS

Some axons within these formations were greatly enlarged. There were variations in the size and number
of the 'onion bulbs' throughout the length of any one root and among different roots. The initial millimetre
of peripheral nerve root adjacent to the central nervous system contained fewer 'onion bulbs'.
The dorsal root ganglia contained neurons of normal appearance. There were no 'onion bulbs' in
the peripheral nerves although some endoneurial fibrosis was noted. A slight focal round cell infiltrate
was seen in several distal root sections and in one peripheral nerve section.
Neurogenic atrophy was observed in skeletal muscles. Extra-ocular muscles and their nerve were
normal.

Whorled structures were seen (fig. 6) within some of the demyelinated plaques located in the
mesencephalon, medulla and spinal cord, which were identical microscopically with the 'onion bulbs'
seen in the roots of the cranial and spinal nerves. Serial sections failed to demonstrate any anatomical
connection between the 'onion bulbs' within the plaques in the CNS and those in the roots of the PNS.
Luxol fast blue preparations showed that the myelin within the 'onion bulbs' in the CNS was dark blue
suggesting that it was of peripheral type.
Electron microscopic studies of the 'onion bulbs' showed similar ultrastructural features regardless
of location within the CNS (fig. 7) or PNS (fig. 8). In both locations they were composed of cells having
a plasma and basement membrane, that is, cells with the typical features of Schwann cells, whose
processes had a whorled or circumferential arrangement about a myelinated axon. Collagen fibres were
seen between Schwann cell processes. Between some of the individual 'onion bulb' formations located
in plaques of demyelination glial fibres were also noted.
Examination of the brachial plexus by both light and electron microscopy showed loss of myelinated
axons and some fibrosis but no evidence of 'onion bulb' formation.
Case 2 (M38-68)
Clinical history. This 61 -year-old white male was first admitted to hospital at the age of 34 because of
a tingling sensation in the fingertips and toes of several months' duration and the recent onset of numbness in the rectum. Examination showed decreased vibration sense in the limbs, loss of sensation within
the rectum and an absent cremasteric reflex. The only abnormality in the cerebrospinal fluid was an
elevated first zone Lange curve. The clinical diagnosis was peripheral neuritis and he was treated with
vitamins.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

FIG. 6. {Case 1) CNS 'onion bulb' formation within a demyelinated plaque. Gomori trichrome.

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

761

FIG. 8. (Case I) Spinal root, 'onion bulb' formation. Note plasma and basement membrane of Schwann cells.
Electron micrograph.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

FIG. 7. (Caie /) CNS, 'onion bulb' formation, within a demyelinated plaque in the spinal cord. Note that
the cells composing the 'onion bulb' have plasma and basement membranes consistent with Schwann cells.
Electron micrograph.

762

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS

Nine years later, the patient was re-admitted because of genitourinary symptoms. During the
intervening years, he had been diagnosed as having multiple sclerosis manifested by an intention
tremor, nystagmus, spastic paraparesis with bilateral Babinski reflexes, ankle clonus and absent
abdominal and cremasteric reflexes.
Eighteen years later the patient was finally re-admitted with aspiration pneumonia. Neurological
examination now showed bilateral optic atrophy, tetraplegia and an inability to talk although he still
seemed able to recognize faces and was able to grunt replies to questions. He died twenty-seven years
after the onset of his illness.

Case 3 (M70-68)
Clinical history. This 63-year-old white male first noticed the onset of neurological symptoms nineteen
years earlier when he suddenly found that his left leg was unable to support him. He recovered from this
within a month, but was left with a slight residual limp. Four years later, he awoke one morning and
found that he had weakness of both legs. During the next few years, his walking continued to deteriorate.
Eight years later, he was unable to hold objects with his right hand and had difficulty using the left hand.
Fifteen years after the onset of his illness, he had become bedridden, unable to sit up in bed without help
and incontinent of urine and faeces. There was no history of neurological disease in the family.
On examination the left optic disc was slightly pale; no field defect was found to confrontation. The
other cranial nerves were normal. A marked spastic weakness was present in all extremities and there
was marked wasting of the arms and legs, and the small muscles of the hands. He was unable to flex
his right hand but could weakly flex his left hand. The left leg was spastic in extension and the right leg
in flexion. Periodic spasms were seen in both legs. The biceps reflexes could not be elicited and the triceps
and brachio-radialis reflexes were weak. The patellar reflex on both sides was hyperactive, while the
Achilles tendon reflex was absent. The abdominal reflexes were also absent. Both Babinski reflexes were
upgoing. Decreased perception of pin-prick and touch was noted over the ventral surface of the first
and second finger of the right hand. The remaining sensory examination was normal.
General laboratory tests were normal. A serum B12 level was 126 ng/ml. On a gastric acidity test there
was no free acid, but 8 mEq of total acid. Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed a protein of 83 mg
per cent with an elevated first zone Lange curve, and a negative Wasserman. The cell count was not
recorded.
Four years later, the patient was finally re-admitted with complete tetraplegia and no motor or
sensory function below the neck. He died nineteen years after the onset of his neurological illness.
Pathology. There was bilateral bronchopneumonia. Typical multiple sclerosis plaques were present
in the cerebral hemispheres and spinal cord. The cervical and thoracic regions of the spinal cord were
extensively involved in contrast to the pons and medulla where only two small plaques were found.
Except for an occasional perivascular collection of inflammatory cells, the demyelinated plaques were
gliotic without inflammatory cells at their borders or around vessels.
There were typical 'onion bulbs' in all the spinal roots and they were most conspicuous in the anterior
roots in the cervical and lumbar regions. Of the three cranial nerves sampled, only the trigeminal
contained 'onion bulbs'. There were focal differences in the organization of the 'onion bulb' formations

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

Pathology. There was bilateral bronchopneumonia.
Typical plaques of multiple sclerosis were found in the cerebral hemispheres, the optic nerves, the
brain-stem, the cerebellum and the spinal cord. Some plaques contained perivascular inflammatory
infiltrates. Rosen thai fibres were seen in one cerebellar plaque.
Microscopically, one anterior cervical root of the three spinal roots sampled showed 'onion bulbs'
limited to a focal region. No such formations were noted in the cranial or peripheral nerves, although
these were not extensively sampled. One spinal root contained a scanty collection of lymphocytes
around one vessel. Aberrant nerve fibres, so-called central schwannosis, were seen about one vessel in
a thoracic spinal cord section. 'Onion bulbs' were not seen within the CNS.

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

tg$

some being tightly packed and dense and others loose. Although there was increased cellularity in some
roots, no inflammatory infiltrates were seen. The distal peripheral nerves were not examined
histologically.

FIG. 9. (Case 4) Low medulla, 'onion bulb' formations within a plaque of demyelination. LFB-PAS.
Pathology. Extensive plaques of multiple sclerosis were found in the cerebral hemispheres, brain-stem,
cerebellum and spinal cord. Perivascular round cell infiltrates were occasionally noted. 'Onion bulbs'
identical to those described in the previous cases were noted in the CNS within one plaque of
demyelination in the low medulla (fig. 9). For the most part, these formations were isolated within the
plaque, although occasionally they were arranged as small groups with an appearance resembling
aberrant nerve fibres (fig. 10). The myelin sheaths of these formations stained dark blue in luxol fast
blue-PAS preparations, identical to those described in Case 1. Serial sections through the pyramids
were not done although careful microscopic examination failed to show any connection between the
'onion bulbs' located in the medulla with its surface or the adjacent cranial nerve roots.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

Case 4 (M-8-55)
Clinical history. The patient, at the age of 25, became lethargic and noticed that his right eye turned
inwards over a period of a week. Although the medial deviation of the right eye improved during the
next three months, he then had increasing loss of vision in that eye for four to five days, culminating in
blindness lasting for one week. His vision returned to normal within a few days. Subsequently, he had
attacks of numbness lasting for a minute, occurring fifteen or more times a day and involving the right
arm and leg with sparing of the foot. Several months later, the right leg, left arm and hand became stiff.
He became so unsteady that he frequently fell. His difficulty with balance and the weakness in his hand
remitted about seven months later. Several months afterwards he developed diplopia.
Neurological examination showed nystagmus and failure of the left eye to maintain convergence.
All tendon reflexes were increased on the right side. Bilateral ankle clonus and Babinski responses were
present. Finger-to-nose testing was poorly performed. Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid showed
100 cells and a positive Pandy test.
During the following years, he became bedridden and developed a coarse nystagmus and spastic
legs. He died of pneumonia at the age of 50 years.

764

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS

The peripheral nerve roots adjacent to the other three spinal cord levels sampled were well myelinated
and no 'onion bulb' formation was observed. The cranial nerves and the more distal peripheral nerves
were not examined.

DISCUSSION

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

These 4 cases show the typical pathological features of multiple sclerosis—
definite plaques of demyelination with relative sparing of axons. Although various
regions within the CNS were involved, the spinal cord in all 4 cases contained the
most extensive plaques of demyelination. Rosenthal fibres were found in several
plaques in Cases 1 and 2. The optic nerves which were studied showed demyelination.
Scanty to moderate numbers of mononuclear cells and lymphocytes were found in
some plaques within the CNS in all 4 cases.
Typical 'onion bulb' formation identical to those described in the hypertrophic
polyneuropathies (Austin, 1956) was identified in the spinal roots (PNS) in Cases 1,
2 and 3. Electron microscopy in Case 1 showed these 'onion bulbs' to have ultrastructural features of Schwann cell processes concentrically arranged around
myelinated axons (Webster, Schroder, Asbury and Adams, 1967). The extent of
these changes varied along the course of the nerve and from case to case. Generally,
the most proximal millimetre of the nerve roots adjacent to the spinal cord and
brain-stem appeared to be less affected than their mid-portions. 'Onion bulb' formations were less numerous in the distal roots. In Case 1 there were 'onion bulbs'
in all anterior and posterior (PNS) roots as well as in the third to twelfth cranial
nerves. In contrast, they were seen in only one nerve root in Case 2. Scanty round
cell inflammatory infiltrates were seen in rare distal nerve roots in Cases 1 and 2
and in one distal nerve in Case 1.
In addition to typical 'onion bulb' formation within the PNS, there were in
Cases 1 and 4 identical 'onion bulbs' within the CNS confined to plaques of
demyelination (figs. 6, 9 and 10). To our knowledge, this is the first description of
such an occurrence. Electron microscopy of these formations from one multiple
sclerosis plaque in Case 1 showed them to be consistent with Schwann cells (fig. 7).
Glial fibres were seen between the 'onion bulbs'. The myelin around the axons in
their centres appeared to be of the peripheral type since it stained dark blue in luxol
fast blue-PAS preparations (Feigen and Cravioto, 1961). The Schwann cells within
the 'onion bulbs' in the CNS did not appear to be in continuity with the adjacent
peripheral nerve roots. Serial sections in Case 1 failed to show any anatomical
connection between these formations and the surface of the spinal cord; in Case 4
'onion bulb' formation was seen within a plaque of demyelination in the low
medulla despite its absence in the PNS roots examined.
Although typical Schwann cell 'onion bulbs' have not previously been reported
within multiple sclerosis plaques, some authors have reported that peripheral
myelin can occur in multiple sclerosis plaques (Feigen, 1969; Feigen and Ogata,
1971). They have suggested that its origin could be from multipotential cells

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

765

residing in the CNS or from Schwann cells which might exist around nerves
accompanying blood vessels. Perivascular schwannosis (Russell and Rubenstein,
1971) was seen in one thoracic spinal cord segment in Case 2. Groups of nerve
fibres resembling aberrant nerve fibres along with 'onion bulb' formation were
seen in one demyelinated plaque from the lower medulla in Case 4 (fig. 10). These
two findings could suggest that the Schwann cell responsible for the 'onion bulbs'
located within the CNS could be derived from Schwann cells residing in the
perivascular spaces. Although their origin is unclear, it appears that when Schwann
cells are located in plaques of multiple sclerosis, they can, under some circumstances,
form true 'onion bulb' formations.

Comparing the pathological findings in these cases (Table 1) with those of the
7 cases of multiple sclerosis and hypertrophic neuropathy already reported in the
literature (Table 2) is difficult since there are obvious differences in tissue sampling.
The spinal cords in our cases and those from the literature appear to contain
the most extensive plaques of demyelination in the CNS except for the case
described by Ninfo et al. in 1967, in which the spinal cord was virtually spared.
The degree and location of 'onion bulb' formation in the PNS roots did not
correlate well with the extent and location of demyelination in the spinal cord
except that the spinal demyelination was more severe than that found in the cords

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

FIG. 10. (Case 4) Low medulla, higher power, 'onion bulbs' and a structure resembling aberrant nerve within
a plaque of demyelination. Myelinated fibres in the 'onion bulbs' stain dark blue with LFB-PAS.

Multiple sclerosis
MS plaques
Spinal
Brain
cord
Case I
(WRVAH A71-63)

Many

Extensive

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

TABLE 1. PATHOLOGICAL FEATURES OF NEW CASES

CNS
'Onion bulb'
formation within
MS plaques

Hypertrophic neuropathy

Rosenlhal
fibres in
CNS plaques

Inflammation

Yes

Yes

Cranial
nerves
Third to
twelfth

Spinal roots
Anterior
Posterior
All

All

Case 2
(M 38-68)

Many

Extensive

Yes

Yes

Case 3
(M 70-69)

Many

Extensive

—

Yes

Fifth
(3 nerves
sampled)

All
All
(Post, roots
more involved)

Case 4
(M-8-55)

Many

Extensive

—

Yes

Not
examined

None
None
(4 levels sampled)

Focal in
one cervical root
(3 roots
sampled)

None

Distal
PNS

Inflammation
PNS

None

Slight

Not
examined

—

r
r

p
Mesencephalon:
Spinal cord

Slight

None

None

None

Not
examined

Low medulla

O
X

o

rn
Z
m

z
o
o
-i

X
Not
examined

(—) = not mentioned in reports or seen on available slides. MS = multiple sclerosis.

m

7>
CO

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

TABLE 2. PATHOLOGICAL FEATURES OF CASES FROM THE LITERATURE

Multiple sclerosis
Spinal
cord

Rosenlhal
fibres
in
CNS plaques

Inflammation

Cranial
nerves

O

Spinal roots
Anterior
Posterior

Distal
PNS

Inflammation
PNS

Yes

Extensive

Yes

None1

None

Most
Most
Some asymmetry

—

None

Schob(l907)

Yes

Extensive

—

Some

V. VI. VI1
VIII, XIII

Many
Many
No details given

Femoral
nerve

None

VI

Some
Some
No details given

—

—

—

—

Schob(l9l2)

Classic MS—no details
given

—

Yes

Kctelacr(l966from a review)

Yes

Ninfown/. (1967)

Yes

None

—

Jcllinger (1969from a review)

Yes

Extensive

—

Extensive
—
(especially
thoracic
lumbar levels)
Yes
No details given

—

Some in
cerebrum and
spinal cord
—
Some in
brain

—

Many
More
Lower thoracic
lumber levels;
Asymmetry
—

Several
—
No details given

Z

o

None

AM

All

Ulnar n.;
brachial
plexus;
sciatic n.

?some

None

None

Levels
C3-C6
bilat. but
asymmetry

No exam.

None

(—) = not mentioned in reports.

2
>

JS A N D PNS

Schob(l923)

—

T]

o70
TIONS I

Denklcr(1904)

(ION I1ULB

Brain

Hypertrophic neuropathy

768

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

of random cases of multiple sclerosis. Some inflammatory infiltrates were found
within the plaques in the CNS in the cases described by Schob (1907, 1923) and
Ninfo et al. (1967) and in all the present cases. There was also a variable degree
of involvement of cranial and peripheral nerves by 'onion bulb' formation in the
present cases and in those from the literature. 'Onion bulb' formation was found
in the distal peripheral nerves in Schob's (1909) and Ninfo et al.'s (1967) cases.
Scanty inflammatory infiltrates were seen in the PNS in our Cases 1 and 2 and
possibly in Ninfo et al.'s (1967) case.
Clinically, the question must be raised whether cases showing multiple sclerosis
and hypertrophic polyneuropathy can be differentiated from cases of either
multiple sclerosis alone or from the polyneuropathy alone. Wartenberg (1958)
reviewed and compiled the literature on polyneuritis and multiple sclerosis up to
that time, and Keuter (1967) more recently discussed this from a clinical point of
view. After reviewing the 7 previous cases and our own series, we think that these
patients have clinical and laboratory findings consistent with CNS dysfunction.
Most had neuro-ophthalmological disorders as well as a long progressive relapsing
course. Two cases (Jellinger, 1969; our Case 1) had a family history of multiple
sclerosis. A clinical diagnosis of multiple sclerosis was made in our Cases 2, 3 and 4,
and in most of the cases in the literature. Despite this diagnosis, several of these
cases also showed definite dysfunction of the PNS. In contrast, the clinical diagnosis
of multiple sclerosis was not made in our Case 1 in which PNS dysfunction predominated. Early loss of the deep tendon reflexes, dilatedfixedpupils with paralysis
of accommodation, deafness and the extremely high spinal fluid protein level in
Case 1 are atypical for multiple sclerosis and more consistent with generalized
polyneuritis. Pathologically, multiple sclerosis was obvious as well as hypertrophic
neuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy was the initial diagnosis in our Case 2.
Decreased reflexes in the arms and numbness over the ventral aspect of the first
and second fingers were described in our Case 3. A sensory motor chronic
neuropathy was the initial impression in Ninfo et al.'s case (1967).
We conclude that multiple sclerosis associated with hypertrophic polyneuropathy
should be suspected clinically when a patient with disseminated neurological
deficits has additional evidence of dysfunction of the PNS such as absent tendon
reflexes. On the other hand, the same clinical suspicion should be raised in a patient
with polyneuropathy in whom there is evidence of dysfunction of the CNS such
as cortical blindness associated with a long, relapsing course involving the
pyramidal system, brain-stem or cerebellum.
Is the simultaneous occurrence of multiple sclerosis and hypertrophic 'onion
bulb' neuropathy a chance concurrence of two disease processes or is there an
interrelationship between them? At present it is impossible to answer this. The
results of clinical immunological studies in our Case 1 are interesting as lymphoblastic transformation was positive for both CNS myelin basic protein and
peripheral nerve antigen in the CNS. Sensitivity to PNS antigen is found in most
patients with acute inflammatory polyneuritis (Arnason, 1975; Behan, Behan,

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

769

CONCLUSION

The existence of typical multiple sclerosis with 'onion bulbs' comprised of
Schwann cells around axons has been described in 4 autopsied cases. In 3 of
these cases there were 'onion bulbs' in the roots of the PNS identical to those seen
in the hypertrophic neuropathies.
In one of these 3 cases, structurally identical 'onion bulbs' were seen around
axons in the CNS within several multiple sclerosis plaques. A fourth case had
'onion bulbs' within a plaque of demyelination although they were not observed
in peripheral nerve roots. Serial histological sections in one case failed to demonstrate any direct connection between 'onion bulbs' in the CNS and PNS. The
possible origin of these formations was discussed. Seven cases from the literature
of simultaneous multiple sclerosis and hypertrophic neuropathy were compared
pathologically and clinically with these 4 cases. Immunological findings in one of
our cases showed sensitivity to CNS myelin, basic protein and PNS antigen.
Clearly, multiple sclerosis and hypertrophic neuropathy can occur together
and axons in multiple sclerosis plaques can be surrounded by Schwann cell 'onion
bulb' formation. Whether there is a relationship between the demyelinating
processes in the CNS and PNS must await further study. Clinically, these cases
should be suspected when a patient with multiple sclerosis shows unequivocal
findings of dysfunction of the PNS or when a patient with polyneuropathy shows
evidence of multiple disorders of the CNS with a long relapsing course.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

Feldman and Kies, 1972). The nosology of acute and chronic inflammatory
neuropathy and their relationship to each other is unsettled (Arnason, 1975;
Dyck, Lais, Ohta, Bastron, Okazaki and Groover, 1975). It seems established that
some cases of hypertrophic neuropathy begin or evolve from cases of an inflammatory neuropathy. Generally, the nerves in these cases show some inflammatory
infiltrates, although these infiltrates are geographically variable and can be missed
by inadequate sampling. Cases 1 and 2 in our series showed some inflammatory
infiltrates in the PNS. Cases 3 and 4 were not extensively sampled. Ninfo et al.'s
case (1967) showed possible inflammatory infiltrates in the PNS.
The subject of sensitivity to CNS myelin basic protein in multiple sclerosis is
controversial (Alvord, Hsu and Thorn, 1974; Arnason, 1975; Behan, Geschwind,
Lamarche, Lisak and Kies, 1968; Behan et al., 1972; Sheremata, Cosgrove and
Eylar, 1974). Even though the significance of the immunological data is confusing,
it seems definite that sensitivity to CNS myelin basic protein and to PNS antigen
was demonstrated in our Case 1 which, at autopsy, had unequivocal evidence of
demyelinating processes in the CNS and PNS. The interrelationship, in our view,
between the distinct pathological processes in the PNS and CNS remains unclear,
but should be studied further as other cases become available.

770

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank Dr. J. D. Leith for performing the autopsy and helping with the literature; Dr. B. G.
Arnason, Dr. E. C. Dooling, Dr. Umberto DeGirolami and Dr. J. H. Morris for their helpful suggestions
in the preparation of the manuscript; and Dr. H. Renke and Dr. P. Paci for their help in translating the
German and Italian literature.

APPENDIX
SUMMARIES OF PREVIOUSLY PUBLISHED CASES

Schob (1907)
Clinical history. At the age of 18 years, the patient reportedly suffered head trauma. At 20, he was noted to be
fatigued, complained of vertigo and could not walk. Two years later, he was seen in a psychiatric clinic. The pupils
were equal and reactive, and eye movements were normal. The arms were spastic and there was ataxia of the left
leg and tremor of the right leg. The tendon reflexes were hyperactive and clonus was noted. The patient was
demented. Eleven years later, severe contractures, incontinence and dementia with euphoria were observed.
Terminally, optic atrophy was noted although he was not blind. The legs were paralysed. He died after becoming
febrile and comatose.
Pathology. Examination of the brain showed typical plaques of multiple sclerosis in the cerebral hemispheres,
some of these periventricular in location. An optic nerve was involved. There were many plaques in the brainstem and they were even more numerous in the spinal cord. No inflammation was seen in the brain, but some
perivascular inflammatory infiltrates were seen in the spinal cord.
Many of the posterior and anterior spinal roots were thickened although the exact spinal levels and locations
were not given. Longitudinal sections showed focal 'onion bulb' formation varying from point to point along the
course of the spinal nerves. Similar formations were seen in the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and twelfth cranial
nerves. The trigeminal ganglia were normal; no other ganglia were examined.
Examination of the distal peripheral nervous system revealed some 'onion bulb' formation in the femoral
nerve. No inflammatory infiltrates were seen in the roots or peripheral nerves. The autonomic nervous system was
not described.
Schob (1912)
Clinical history. No clinical details were given in this brief communication.
Pathology. Very few morphological details are given although typical multiple sclerosis was present in the CNS.
Examination of the cranial and spinal nerve roots showed 'onion bulb' formation in the sixth cranial nerve and
some of the spinal nerve roots. No other details are available.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

Denkler (1904)
Clinical history. This woman first became ill at the age of 15 years when she experienced fatigue and progressive
weakness. Six years later, she could walk only with a crutch and complained of vertigo and disturbances in vision.
Twelve years later, she suddenly became unable to stand or walk and developed complete paraparesis, bladder
symptoms and constipation. The left eye was blind, although the pupils reacted normally. Nystagmus was absent.
The upper extremities showed good power, but the lower extremities were very weak. The tendon reflexes were
hyperactive and Babinski responses were present. Sensory examination was normal, and mental status appeared
intact. She died aged 43 years of septicaemia.
Pathology. Grossly, the brain was normal and the spinal cord was small. Many typical plaques of multiple
sclerosis were seen in sections of the medulla and spinal cord. The cerebrum contained some plaques near the
cortex but they were fewer than in the medulla. The axons were relatively well preserved, and the myelin breakdown
was of the sudanophilic type. Some loss of axons was seen in the most severe regions of demyelination. The most
extensive demyelination occurred in the spinal cord and ranged from diffuse in the lumbar region to three-quarters
of the cross-sectional diameter at the high thoracic cervical level to one-half the diameter of the upper cervical
level.
Most of the anterior and posterior spinal roots were remarkable thickened. At the maximum this thickness was
equal to the diameter of a pea with asymmetry among the involved roots. Microscopic examination showed
typical 'onion bulb' formation along with hyalinized small blood vessels. The dorsal root ganglia were not
examined. The cranial nerves were not involved. Neither the distal peripheral nervous system nor the autonomic
nervous system was described. No inflammation was found in the CNS or in the roots of the PNS.

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

771

Schob (1923)
Clinical history. At the age of 22 years, after having scarlet fever, this patient experienced weakness in the right
leg which improved over a period of eight weeks. Thirteen years later, she again became weak in the legs, and
'frequent fevers' often associated with neurological symptoms were noted. She could walk only with a cane.
One year later, she again had high fever, joint pain, euphoria and delusions. Paresis of the legs was noted. She
was given anti-streptococcal serum for rheumatic fever. Babinski signs were present and the tendon reflexes were
hyperactive. She had a relapsing course, and six years later, at the age of 42 years, died of a high fever.
Pathology. The brain contained typical plaques of multiple sclerosis and the optic nerves showed demyelination.
The medulla was not available for study. The spinal cord showed multiple plaques with almost complete demyelination in the lower thoracic and upper lumbar regions. Some perivascular inflammatory cells were seen in the
cerebrum and spinal cord.
Examination of the PNS roots showed enlargement of some in the lower thoracic and lumbar regions. The
posterior roots were more involved'than the anterior. The cranial nerves and distal PNS were not described.

Ninfo et al. (1967)
Clinical history. The patient was a 61-year-old female who first noticed parxsthesise of the distal parts of the legs,
and progressive difficulty of dorsiflexion of the feet when she was 41 years of age. Impairment of fine movements
of the fingers along with slight ataxia were attributed to sensory and motor polyneuropathy. During the following
year the course was slowly progressive. Four years later, slow athetoid movements of the fingers and hands were
observed. She was admitted to a neurological hospital at the age of 47 where examination showed the interosseous
muscles and the thenar eminence to be somewhat wasted as were the muscles of the leg. The reflexes were normal
and symmetrical in the upper extremities. The ankle-jerks were absent and the plantar responses were bilaterally
flexor. She was ataxic, and cerebellar function was impaired. Laboratory tests showed an albumino-cytological
dissociation in the CSF. The movement disorder improved, although no changes were noted in the 'peripheralneuropathic symptomatology'. The patient was readmitted twelve years later. Her clinical condition had so
worsened that she now could not walk, and the arms were weak proximally. Clonic movements of the facial
muscles were present, and muscle wasting involved the muscles of the hands, forearms, shoulder girdle and legs
bilaterally. Ataxia was severe, and dysmetria and staccato speech were noted. The tendon reflexes were absent.
Babinski responses could not be elicited. There was loss of the pupillary reflexes. Miosis was present; convergence
was normal. There was decreased perception of position sense. The sciatic nerve, external popliteal and femoral
nerve were firm and non-tender to palpation. The CSF had a high protein content. The patient died suddenly
after an illness of approximately twenty years.
Pathology. There was moderate cerebral atrophy and hydrocephalus ex vacuo. Small plaques typical of multiple
sclerosis were scattered in the subcortical white matter and periventricular regions of the cerebral hemispheres.
The pons, middle cerebellar peduncle, cerebellum, and the medulla at the origin of the facial and glosso-pharyngeal
nerves also contained plaques. These plaques showed variable perivascular inflammation, gliosis and numbers of
macrophages. No plaques were seen in the spinal cord although there was slight myelin pallor and gliosis of the
posterior columns. The anterior horn cells were reduced in number, and those remaining showed degrees of
chromatolysis.
Both the anterior and posterior spinal roots at all levels were enlarged and thickened and contained typical
'onion bulbs'. Bundles of Schwann cells criss-crossed the spinal ganglion. In the distal PNS, the ulnar and sciatic
nerves and brachial plexus contained typical 'onion bulb' formation. Some peripheral nerves showed only fibrosis,
and some contained mononuclear cells. Neurogenic atrophy was present in the muscle. The cranial nerves were
not described.
Jellinger (1969)
Clinical history. The patient was a 30-year-old female with a fifteen-year illness. A sister had had multiple
sclerosis. Detailed clinical findings were not givefl about this patient.
Pathology. Sections of the slightly atrophic brain showed plaques typical of multiple sclerosis in the cerebral
hemispheres, brain-stem and spinal cord. The spinal cord was the most extensively involved.
Examination of the PNS showed marked thickening unilaterally of the anterior spinal roots, C3-C6. Microscopically, typical 'onion bulb' formation was noted in these roots. The spinal ganglia and distal PNS were not
sampled. Inflammation was not described.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

Ketelaer (1966)
Clinical history. No clinical details of this case were given.
Pathology. Typical changes of multiple sclerosis were found, and the spinal cord was especially severely involved.
Examination of the PNS showed 'onion bulb' formation in several (unspecified) spinal roots. Neither the cranial
nerves nor the distal PNS was described. Inflammation was not mentioned.

772

WILLIAM C. SCHOENE AND OTHERS
REFERENCES

ALVORD, E. C , HSU, P. C. and THORN, R. (1974) Leukocyte sensitivity to brain fractions in neurological
disease. Archives of Neurology, 30, 296-299.
ARNASON, B. G. W. (1975) Inflammatory polyradiculoneuropathies. In: Peripheral Neuropathy,
vol. II. Edited by P. J. Dyck, P. K. Thomas and E. H. Lambert. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders
Co., pp. 1110-1148.
AUSTIN, J. H. (1956) Observations on the syndrome of hypertrophic neuritis. (The hypertrophic
interstitial radiculoneuropathies.) Medicine, 35, 187-237.
BEHAN, P. O., BEHAN, W. M. H., FELDMAN, R. G. and KIES, M. W. (1972) Cell-mediated hypersensitivity

to neural antigens: occurrence in human patients and non-human primates with neurological
disease. Archives of Neurology, 27, 145-152.
KIES, M. W. (1968) Delayed

hypersensitivity to encephalitogenic protein in disseminated encephalomyelitis. Lancet, 2,
1009-1012.
DENKLER, F. (1904) Zur Kasuistik der multiplen Herdsklerose des Gehirns und Ruckenma'rks. Deutsche
Zeitschrift fur Nervenheilkunde, 26, 233-247.
DYCK, P. J., LAIS, A. C , OHTA, M., BASTRON, J. A., OKAZAKI, H. and GROOVER, R. V. (1975) Chronic

inflammatory polyradiculoneuropathy. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 50, 621-637.
FEIGEN, I. (1969) Mesenchymal tissues of the nervous system, the indigenous origin of brain macrophages
in hypoxic states and in multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental
Neurology, 28, 6-23.
and CRAVIOTO, H. (1961) A histochemical study of myelin, a difference in the solubility of the
glycolipid components in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Journal of Neuropathology
and Experimental Neurology, 20, 245-254.
OGATA, J. (1971) Schwann cells and peripheral myelin within human central nervous tissues:
the mesenchymal character of schwann cells. Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental
Neurology, 30, 603-612.
JELLINGER, K. (1969) Einige Morphologische Aspekte der Multiplen Sklerose. Wiener Zeitschrift fur
Nervenheilkunde und deren Grenzgebiete. Suppl. II, 12-37.
KETELAER, CH. J., LERUITTE, A. and PERIER, O. (1966) Histopathologic de la Moelle Lombo-Sacree et

de la Queue de Cheval dans une Serie de Cas Verifies de Sclerose en Plaques. Acta Neurologica
Scandinavica, 42, Supplement 20, 33-51.
KEUTER, E. J. W. (1967) Polyneuritis and multiple sclerosis. Psychiatrica Neurologica Neurochirurgica,
' 70, 271-279.
NINFO, V., RIZZUTO, N. and TERZIAN, H. (1967) Associazione Anatomo—Clinica di Nevrite ipertrofica
e Sclerosi a Placche. Acta Neuroligica (Napoli), 22, 228-237.
RUSSELL, D. S. and RUBINSTEIN, L. J. (1971) Pathology of tumours of the nervous system. In: Congenital
Tumours of Maldevelopmental Origin. Third Edition. London, Arnold, pp. 13-47.
SCHOB, F. (1907) Ein Beitrag zur Pathologischen Anatomic der Multiplen Sklerose. Monatsschrift fur
Psychiatrie und Neurologie, 22, 62-87.
(1912) Wurzetfibromatose bei Multiplen Sklerose. Muenchener Medizinische Wochenschrift,
2, 1831.

Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

GESCHWIND, N., LAMARCHE, J. B., LISAK, R. P. and

'ONION BULB' FORMATIONS IN CNS AND PNS

773

SCHOB, F. (1923) Ober Wurzelfibromatose bei Multipler Sklerose. Zeitschrift fur die Gesante Neurologie
und Psychiatrie, 83, 481-496.
SHEREMATA, W., COSGROVE, J. B. R. and EYLAR, E. H. (1974) Cellular hypersensitivity to basic myelin
(AJ protein and clinical multiple sclerosis. New England Journal of Medicine, 291, 14-17.
WARTENBERG, R. (1958) Neuritis, Sensory Neuritis, Neuralgia: A Clinical Study with Review of the
Literature. London: Oxford University Press, pp. 296-305.
WEBSTER, DE F. H., SCHRODER, J. M., ASBURY, A. K. and ADAMS, R. D. (1967) The role of Schwann cells

in the formation of 'onion bulbs' found in chronic neuropathies. Journal of Neuropathology
and Experimental Neurology, 26, 276-299.
(Received September 21, 1976)
Downloaded from http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on February 18, 2016

