743

TABLE I-ISOLATED CONGENITAL SCALP DEFECT IN SPANISH
REGIONS 1980-91

TABLE II-SPANISH REGIONS WITH POISONING OUTBREAKS
AND REGIONS WITH ISOLATED CASES OF CONGENITAL SCALP
APLASIA CUTIS

*As number/total live births.

I

and there is clinical evidence that pregnant women treated with
methimazole because of hyperthyroidism are at increased risk of
having children with a characteristic scalp defect (aplasia cutis).3
Although this defect is thought of as a minor anomaly, there is a
suggestion that it could be a minimal expression of a more serious
pattern of defects.3 Follow-up studies on such children have not
been done.
Over the past decade the Spanish Collaborative Study of
Congenital Malformations (ECEMC), a case-control study and
surveillance system,4 has observed a significant (p < 0-005)
increasing trend (table I, figure) for numbers of children with
isolated scalp defects (aplasia cutis). This trend was not related to
maternal treatment for hyperthyroidism-indeed, we have
identified only one child with isolated scalp aplasia cutis prenatally
exposed to carbimazole because of maternal hyperthyroidism, and
this case was excluded from our analysis. We also excluded
dominant forms of congenital scalp aplasia.
A registry undertaking surveillance of congenital defects works
on the assumption that if a teratogenic agent is introduced into the
environment, the registry will detect an increasing prevalence of the
congenital defects related to that agent. Our interpretation of the
increase in congenital scalp aplasia cutis (a defect that has been
related to prenatal exposure to methimazole) is that it could be due
to the illicit and uncontrolled use of methimazole in animal feed.
Since methimazole is illicitly used with and without clenbuterol, we
speculate that in some (if not all) places where we know that
clenbuterol has been used because it produced an outbreak of
poisoning, methimazole has also been used at least at times. If so,
most cases of congenital scalp aplasia cutis would come from those
places. We have, therefore, compared regions in which the first
outbreak of poisoning with clenbuterol was observed1 with regions
where isolated congenital scalp aplasia cutis has been detected, and
the results (table n) support our hypothesis. 7 of the cases of isolated

congenital scalp aplasia

were

bom between

Prevalence of isolated scalp defect
Linear trend

x-8 65 (p<0005).

August, 1990,

(aplasia cutis).

and

*Prevalence did not increase overtime.

March, 1991, and all 7 came from regions affected by the outbreak
of poisoning from March to July, 1990.
Public-health authorities should be

aware

that methimazole

illicitly used in animal feeding to retain water and increase weight
could be a health hazard.

Supported in part by a grant from Direccion General de Salud Publica and
by Direccion General de Farmacia y Productos Sanitarios, Ministerio de
Sandidad y Consumo, Madrid.
ECEMC
and Hospital Universitario San Carlos,
Faculty of Medicine,
Universidad Complutense,
28040 Madrid, Spain

M. L. MART&Iacute;NEZ-FR&Iacute;AS
A. CEREIJO
E. RODR&Iacute;GUEZ-PINILLA
M. URIOSTE

JF. Food poisoning related to consumption of illicit &bgr;-agonist in
liver. Lancet 1990; 336: 1311.
2. Pulce C, Lamaison D, Keck G, et al. Intoxication alimentaire collective due &agrave; la
presence de r&eacute;sidus de clenbut&eacute;rol dans du foie de veau. Bull Epidemiol Hebd 1991;
5: 17-18.
3. Milham S Jr. Scalp defects in infants of mothers treated for hyperthyroidism with
methimazole or carbimazole during pregnancy. Teratology 1985; 32: 321.
4. Mart&iacute;nez-Fr&iacute;as ML, Salvador J. Epidemiological aspects of prenatal exposure to high
doses of vitamin A in Spain. Eur J Epidemiol 1990; 6: 118-23.
1. Martinez-Navarro

Homozygous protein C deficiency with late
onset and recurrent coumarin-induced skin

necrosis
SiR.&mdash;Ms Grundy et all (Aug 31, 1991, p 575) confirmed by
genetic DNA analysis the existence of homozygous protein C
deficiency in a male individual with moderately severe deficiency

and late onset of clinical symptoms. We have made similar
observations in three unrelated families.
Patient l-A 17-year-old youth had an iliofemoral thrombosis
confirmed by venography after trauma. On three occasions over
eight months, oral anticoagulation was begun but had to be
discontinued because at the start of treatment, ecchymoses,
haematoma, and skin necrosis-associated with signs of
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIG)&mdash;were seen. He was
successfully treated with phenprocoumon, with initial intravenous
heparin at high doses.1 He has now received this treatment for 7
years. Protein C activity and antigen concentrations are now low (16
and 10 units/dl), and one homozygous aminoacid replacement was
predicted at position 168 (ProLeu) of the protein C molecule,
after complete sequencing of the protein C genes z His parents are
cousins and heterozygous deficiency was found in both, and in 5
additional family members. These 7 heterozygotes had had between
them only one thrombotic episode (superficial thrombophlebitis in
the mother at age 38).
Patient 2-A 57-year-old woman had been symptom-free until
age 45, despite appendicectomy and three pregnancies. Then, she
had three episodes of distal deep vein thrombosis (DVT) (at age 45,
52, and 54) and skin necrosis (at the start and after 7 months of oral
anticoagulant treatment). She is at present treated with low
molecular weight heparin and has been free of symptoms for 20

744

months. Her protein C activity and antigen concentrations were
both repeatedly 20 units/dL Again, after complete sequencing of the
coding regions of the protein C genes, one homozygous aminoacid
replacement (Ala-.Thr) was predicted at position 267.2 Her
parents are cousins and her daughter, aged 31 years, is heterozygous
protein C deficient and remains symptom-free despite two
pregnancies and 6 years of oestrogen-progestagen treatment.
Patient 3-A 42-year-old woman remained symptom-free until
the 5th month of her first pregnancy, at age 24, when DVT
developed. During her second pregnancy she received prophylactic
heparin at the end of pregnancy and post partum; severe skin
necrosis occurred when oral anticoagulant treatment was started.
She later had another episode of DVT and a few episodes of
superficial vein thromboses. Because on a second occasion skin
necrosis occurred in association with oral anticoagulation, she now
receives episodic heparin treatments. Protein C activity and antigen
were 23 and 22 units/dl, respectively. The patient was homozygous
for a Gly z Ser transition in the triplet coding for glycine at position
301. Her parents are first cousins. Her mother possibly had DVT
during pregnancy and post partum, and died at age 51 from stroke
associated with hypertension. Two of her children are heterozygous
for protein deficiency and are symptom-free.
These 3 cases have some features in common: no purpura
fulminans or massive thrombosis at birth, late onset of thrombotic
symptoms (between 17 and 45 years), repeated episodes of skin
necrosis related to oral anticoagulation, consanguinity, and, finally,
detectable protein activity and antigen in plasma. DNA analysis of
the protein genes demonstrated that all 3 patients were homozygous
for a single nucleotide replacement in the protein C gene. The three
mutations all seem to result in much reduced but detectable protein
activity and antigen in plasma, indicating that the variant protein C
molecules are either produced at a reduced rate or removed from the
circulation at an increased rate. The delayed onset of thrombosis
and its mild clinical expression in these homozygotes suggest that at
birth the reduced protein C levels are sufficiently high to protect the
patient against development of the massive thrombosis and purpura
fulminans seen in the severely deficient homozygous or double

heterozygous patients.3
In these 3 homozygous patients, skin necrosis, often associated
with biological signs of DIC, was a common complication of oral
anticoagulation. This raises questions about the clinical
management of such patients. Administration of protein C
concentrates might be helpful to prevent skin necrosis at the start of
oral anticoagulants.
J.CONARD
Central

Laboratory of Haematology.

H&ocirc;tel-Dieu,
75181 Paris, France
Haemostasis and Thrombosis Research Unit.

University Hospital,

Leiden, Netherlands

M. H. HORELLOU
P. VAN DREDEN
M. SAMAMA

P. H. REITSMA
S. POORT
R. M. BERTINA

1 Samama M, Horellou MH, Soria J, Conrad J, Nicolas G. Successful progressive
anticoagulation in a severe protein C deficiency and previous skin necrosis at the
initiation of oral anticoagulant treatment. Throw Haemost 1984; 51: 132-33.
2. Reitsma PH, Poort SR, Allaart CF, Briet E, Bertina RM The spectrum of genetic
defects in a panel of 40 Dutch families with symptomatic protein C deficiency type
I. heterogeneity and founder effects. Blood 1991; 78: 890-94
3. Marlar RA, Montgomery RR, Broekmans AW. Diagnosis and treatment of
homozygous protein C deficiency. J Pediatr 1989; 114: 528-34.

Prevention of shoulder pain after

laparoscopy

SIR,-Dr Narchi and colleagues (Dec 21/28, p 1569) describe a
way to prevent shoulder pain after day-care laparoscopy. They state

that 35-60% of patients complain of postoperative shoulder pain
and that this can delay discharge. Although intraperitoneal
instillation of a local anaesthetic may be suitable for diagnostic
laparoscopy, it would not be so during laparoscopy done for fertility
treatment. Over 4500 laparoscopies have been done at our two
centres during GIFT treatment over the past 5 years. We routinely
used the double-puncture method for both diagnostic laparoscopy
and GIFT. At the end of the procedure, valves of both the cannulae

(subumbilical and suprapubic) are opened and we allow gas to
escape. The patient continues to lie in the Trendelenburg position,
which allows most of the residual gas to collect in the pelvis and
lower abdominal region. An assistant then applies gentle, steady
pressure to the flanks and at the same time the subumbilical cannula
is gradually withdrawn, after which the operator applies additional
gentle pressure to the epigastric and umbilical area. Thus most of
the residual gas escapes via the suprapubic cannula. While this is
being done the suprapubic cannula is gradually withdrawn. The
operating table is then straightened and incisions are sutured.
Since we have adopted this procedure the frequency of shoulder
pain after laparoscopy has decreased strikingly and we cannot
recollect any patient who had to stay overnight solely because of
such pain. Although we think that Narchi and colleagues’
suggestion of intraperitoneal instillation of a local anaesthetic is
interesting, it may not be strictly necessary since the same results
can be achieved by providing the patient with an abdominal squeeze
at the end of a laparoscopic procedure.
Dubal Fertility
and Women’s Health Centre

Fertility
Gynaecological Centre,
112A Harley St,

PANKAJ SHRIVASTAV
PRASHANT NADKARNI

London

London W1 N 1AF, UK

IAN CRAFT

Breastfeeding and intelligence
SIR,-Dr Lucas and colleagues (Feb 1, p 261) suggest that breast
milk is associated with higher IQ at 71-8 years of age in children
born prematurely, even after adjustment for confounding variables
such as maternal education and social class. Our follow-up studies of
very-low-birthweight children does not accord with their findings.
We have followed to 8 years of age two cohorts of children-85
consecutive survivors of birthweight 500-999 g bom in the 63
months from Jan 1, 1977, and 124 consecutive survivors of
birthweight 1000-1500 g born in the 18 months from Oct 1,1980.
We attempted to see the children at ages of 2, 5, and 8 years,
corrected for premature birth. At these ages, psychologists
administered Bayley scales of infant development, Wechsler
preschool and primary scale of intelligence (WPPSI), and Wechsler
intelligence scale for children (revised) (WISC-R), respectively.
Data on breastfeeding over the first 2 years of life were collected at
the 2-year assessment. There were three groups of children with
respect to breastfeeding; group 1 had received no breast milk at all,
group 2 had received expressed milk but had never been directly
breast fed, and group 3 were eventually directly breast fed.
Of the 209 survivors to 8 years of age, 201 (96-2%) were assessed
at 8 years. 5 children with cerebral palsy could not complete the
WISC-R. Of the 196 children with a WISC-R, 181 (92-3%) had
data relating to breastfeeding in the first 2 years. The children who
had received expressed breast milk had psychological test scores
similar to those of children who had received no breast milk,
whereas those directly breast fed had significantly higher scores
(tables i and n). We then used multiple linear regression analysis to
adjust for the potential confounding variables used by Lucas et
al-namely, social class (professional and skilled workers’ families
vs remainder), maternal education (mother’s schooling < 10 years
vs remainder), birthweight, gestational age, age of mother, gender,
and duration of assisted ventilation. The adjusted data showed that
children who had received expressed breast milk had lower
psychological test scores than those who had received no breast
milk, but no difference was significant. On the other hand, children
who had received direct breastfeeding had psychological test scores
TABLE ]-PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST SCORES RELATED TO BREAST
FEEDING

