Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49:1340-1350, 1991

Two New Arylsulfatase A (ARSA) Mutations in
Metachromatic Leukodystrophy (MLD) Patient
Arvan L. Fluharty,* Claire B. Fluharty,t Wolfgang Bohne,t Kurt
and Volkmar Gieselmannt

von

a

Juvenile

Figura,t

*Lanterman Developmental Center Research Group, Mental Retardation Research Center, University of California School of Medicine
Los Angeles, Pomona; and tBiochemie 11, Georg-August Universidt, G6ttingen

at

Summary
Fragments of the arylsulfatase A (ARSA) gene from a patient with juvenile-onset metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) were amplified by PCR and ligated into MP13 cloning vectors. Clones hybridizing with cDNA
for human ARSA were selected, examined for appropriate size inserts, and used to prepare single-stranded
phage DNA. Examination of the entire coding and most of the intronic sequence revealed two putative
disease-related mutations. One, a point mutation in exon 3, resulted in the substitution of isoleucine by serine.
Introduction of this alteration into the normal ARSA cDNA sequence resulted in a substantial decrease in
ARSA activity on transient expression in cultured baby hamster kidney cells. About 5% of the control
expression was observed, suggesting a small residual activity in the mutated ARSA. The second mutation,
a G-to-A transition, occurred in the other allele and resulted in an altered splice-recognition sequence between
exon 7 and the following intron. The mutation also resulted in the loss of a restriction site. Apparently
normal levels of mRNA were generated from this allele, but no ARSA activity or immuno-cross-reactive
material could be detected. A collection of DNA samples from known or suspected MLD patients, members
of their families, and normal controls was screened for these mutations. Four additional individuals carrying
each of the mutations were found among the nearly 100 MLD patients in the sample. Gene segregation in
the original patient's family was consistent with available clinical and biochemical data. No individuals
homozygous for either of these two mutations were identified. However, combinations with other MLD
mutations suggest that the point mutation in exon 3 does result in some residual enzyme activity and is
associated with late-onset forms of the disease. The splice-site mutation following exon 7 produces lateinfantile MLD when combined with other enzyme-null mutations, implying that it is completely silent enzymat-

ically.
Introduction

Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is a human genetic disease most commonly associated with a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme arylsulfatase A
(ARSA) (Kolodny 1989). MLD is usually subdivided
into three clinical subtypes based on the age at onset.
Typically, the late-infantile form is first noted some-

Received April 30, 1991; revision received July 29, 1991.
Address for correspondence and reprints: Arvan L. Fluharty,
UCLA-MRRC Lanterman Research Group, P.O. Box 100-R, Pomona, CA 91769.
C 1991 by The American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.
0002-9297/91 /4906-0021$02.00

1340

time before the age of 2 years, the juvenile form at
5-10 years of age, and the adult form after sexual
maturity. There is also an apparently benign lowARSA phenotype, which is difficult to differentiate
from MLD on the basis of enzyme measurements (Dubois et al. 1975; Lott et al. 1976). This is commonly
referred to as ARSA pseudodeficiency (PD) (Kihara et
al. 1980). Differences in functional enzyme activity
between PD and the MLD subtypes can be shown in
intact cells by loading with a putative physiological
substrate, cerebroside sulfate (Fluharty et al. 1978).
All of the aforementioned ARSA defects appear to be
due to allelic alterations in the ARSA gene, and their
molecular bases are only now beginning to be understood.

Arylsulfatase A Mutations
Stein et al. (1989) were the first to isolate a cDNA
for human ARSA. Alterations associated with PD and
two MLD-related mutations have recently been reported (Gieselmann et al. 1989; Polten et al. 1991).
The latter two mutations together account for 50%60% of the MLD genes which have been evaluated.
The mutations show a simple genotype-phenotype relationship such that homozygosity for one is always
associated with late-infantile disease, whereas homozygosity for the other is most often found in individuals with adult-onset disease. Mixed heterozygotes for
the two mutations manifest the juvenile form of MLD.
We report here on the characterization of two additional ARSA mutations in a patient with juvenile
MLD. The new mutations appear to be much rarer
than those previously reported, and neither has yet
been found in homozygous combination. However,
their heterozygous combinations with other MLDcausing mutations suggest that they fit into the same
general genotype-phenotype pattern as do the mutations reported elsewhere.
Patient and Methods
The Patient

The patient was one of two children in a family with
no history of neurological disorders. He fits into the
late-juvenile-onset category delineated by Kolodny
(1989). He developed normally through age 9 years.
His early academic performance was superior, and he
played both flute and piano. After an operation at
9.5 years of age, social and scholastic difficulties were
noted. He was often moody, eventually showing problems in short-term memory. In his 11th year he began
psychiatric treatment, and by age 13 years was institutionalized. The progressive nature of the condition
and the development of ataxic symptoms led to a clinical reevaluation. MLD was diagnosed on the basis
of deficient ARSA, urinary sulfatide excretion, and a
white-matter defect. Both the father and older sister
had low enzyme levels and were shown to be carriers
of the ARSA PD allele.
DNA Preparation and PCR Amplification of ARSA
Gene Fragments

Genomic DNA was prepared from cultured fibroblasts derived from a Swiss patient with juvenile MLD
and from members of his family. Coding regions of
the ARSA gene were amplified by the PCR in two
segments, C and D, and were examined as described in

1341

a communication recently published elsewhere (Polten
et al. 1991). The PCR fragments were purified and
ligated into M13 mpl8 and mpl9 cloning vectors.
Viral plaques containing ARSA gene fragments were
identified by hybridization to a radiolabeled human
ARSA cDNA. Ten to 12 plaques of each type and
orientation were selected and grown as minipreps.
Double-stranded phage DNA was isolated and evaluated for inserts of appropriate size, by restrictionenzyme excision and agarose-gel electrophoresis. In
some cases it was necessary to redone virus isolates
to obtain clones of acceptable homogeneity. Several
independent clones of each fragment and each orientation were used to prepare single-stranded DNA for
sequencing.
Sequencing
Sequencing was carried out by the dideoxy chaintermination method (Sanger et al. 1977). Multiple
(usually six or more) clones were used for initial sequence screening. Sequencing primers included the
universal M13 primers, various intron primers, and
an occasional exon primer. Much of the human ARSA
coding region was evaluated in both directions, and
all exons were examined in at least one direction. The
overall sequencing strategy is summarized in figure 1.
Whenever a possible sequence alteration was detected, additional clones covering the same region
were investigated. Sequence differences found in more
than one clone and confirmed in both sequencing diE7S 2195

E3P 799

I

!

''x1

I

ATG

TGA

X:i

X

~
.-

A

AATAAC

D

C

Schematic representation of human ARSA gene
Figure I
structure and sequencing strategy employed. Bars represent exons,
and lines represent introns. Hatched segments represent 5' and 3'
untranslated regions, while blackened segments indicate coding regions. ATG and TGA mark the initiation and termination codons,
respectively, while AATAAC is the normal polyadenylation signal.
The black triangles mark the three potentially glycosylated asparagine residues, while the vertical arrowheads above the gene indicate
the sites of the two mutations described in the present paper. The
lines labeled C and D indicate the regions amplified by PCR and
cloned into M13 mpl 8 and mpl 9. The horizontal arrows under the
amplified gene fragments approximate the segments examined for
sequence variations in coding (-a) or noncoding ( -) clones.

Fluharty et al.

1342

rections were considered to be bona fide mutations.
Once a putative mutant sequence had been identified,
two clones of each genotype (with and without the
mutation) were selected for each strand orientation.
These were then used to survey any remaining sequence in that particular gene subfragment (C or D).
A small number of sequence alterations were detected
only in single clones and were considered to be errors
introduced during PCR amplification. Sequence data
were compared with the human ARSA genomic sequence recently reported by Kreysing et al. (1990).
Oligonucleotides

Oligonucleotides employed as PCR primers, sequencing primers, and sequence-specific probes and
for site-directed mutagenesis were synthesized and purified in the laboratory by Dr. Bernnard Schmidt. An
Applied Biosystems DNA synthesizer was employed.
A listing of the various oligonucleotides used in the
present study is presented in table 1.

PCR

PCR was carried out using Taq polymerase (AmpliTaq) from Cetus, by the procedure outlined elsewhere
(Gieselmann et al. 1989; Polten et al. 1991). A PCcontrolled robot and three regulated waterbaths were
used for thermocycling. The A fragment, encompassing exons 1-3 and including introns, was obtained by using primers ARSA 1c or ARSA 1 ERic
and ARSA 14nc. Fragment C, spanning exons 6-8,
came from primers ARSA 19 ERic and ARSA 20
HI3nc. Fragment D, spanning exons 1-6, was obtained from primers ARSA 1 ERic and ARSA 17
BH1nc. For fragments A and C (approximately 1 kb
each) a PCR program of 1 min denaturation at 970C,
1 min annealing at 500C, and 4 min extension at 700C
was used. For fragment D (approximately 2 kb) the
extension time was increased to 5 min. The buffer,
which differs somewhat from that suggested by Cetus,
has been described elsewhere (Gieselmann et al.
1989).

Table I
Oligonucleotides Employed in Present Study
Designation Structurea (5'-3')
ARSAlc (TGCTGGAGCCAAGTAGCCCT) or
ARSAlER1c (TCGAATTCTGCTGGAGCCAAGTAGCCCT) .................
ARSA14nc
(CAAAGACTGGAGTTAGCACT) ........................................
ARSA19ERlc (CGGAATTCTTGATGGCGAACTGAGTGAC) ..................
ARSA2OHI3nc (GCGAAGCTTCCTCATTCGTACCACAGG)....................
ARSA17nc (CAGTGCAGGAGGCACTGAGG) or
ARSA17BH1nc (GAGGATCCCAGTGCAGGAGGCACTGAGG) .............
ARSA44nc(CAACAGTGGGATGGGGAC) ............................................
ARSA45nc
(CAACAGTGGGCTGGGGAC)...........................................
ARSA49nc
(AGGGGTTACCCTGGGTGA)...........................................
ARSASOnc
(AGGGGTTATCCTGGGTGA) ............................................
ARSA35nc
(ACTTTCCAGTCCGCACAGC)..........................................
ARSA24nc
(TGCAATCCATTGGGAGGAAA).......................................
(TGTCTCAGGGACTCTGTG)..............................................
ARSA30c
ARSA39nc
(TGGTTCCTACCTGGTCGT).............................................
ARSA15c
(ACCTGCCAGCCCAGCCCTCA) ..........................................
ARSA27c (ATGACCTCATGGCCGACGCCCAGCGCCAGG)....................
ARSA23c
(GCTCATGAGCGCCTCCTGTG).........................................
ARSA26nc (AGGGTTCCAAGGAGAGGGCCTGCGGACTGA) .................
ARSA34c
(TATGTGCAGTGCTTG).....................................................
ARSA8nc(GTCAGAGGCTGGAGGCGTG) ...........................................
ARSA2nc
(ACCCAGGCTCTGCCCACAGT) ..........................................
P+(nc)
.............................................
(CTGGTGTTATTACGTTATCA)

Use

PCR primer,
PCR primer,
PCR primer,
PCR primer,

fragments A and D; sequencing
fragment A; sequencing
fragment C
fragment C

PCR primer, fragment D
Site-specific probe
Site-specific probe; mutagenesis
Site-specific probe
Site-specific probe
RFP probe
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing

Sequencing
Sequencing
Sequencing

Sequencing
Sequencing

a
The list includes all of the synthetic oligonucleotides utilized in the present study. They are designated by (1) either "ARSA" or "P + "
and an arbitrary laboratory code number, (2) type of restriction (e.g., ER1), when present, and (3) whether they represent coding (c) or
noncoding (nc) sequences. Some of these oligonucleotides have been reported in previous publications.

Arylsulfatase A Mutations

Site-specific Oligonucleotide Probe (SOP) Screening
Total DNA was prepared from either cultured MLD
fibroblasts or blood leukocytes. The sample population included nearly 150 individuals and was drawn
from western Europe and North America. It was composed of MLD patients, their family members, and
various controls. The MLD sample of approximately
100 individuals included all of the common subtypes
at roughly the frequency at which they occur in the
population. There were also some individuals of uncertain diagnosis.
For SOP analysis, A (or occasionally D) and C fragments were PCR amplified as described above. Filters
were prepared by first subjecting aliquots of the PCR
reaction mixtures to alkaline denaturation. Neutralized samples were then heated to 950C for 5 min and
immediately were applied to the HyBondtm nylon
membranes by using a Schleicher and Schuell slot-blot
apparatus. The usual blot represented 2.5 il of the
PCR reaction mixture but was adjusted upward when
the PCR yield was low. Filters were air-dried and were
fixed to the membrane by UV illumination (30 s, facedown on the transilluminator) followed by heating at
800C for 1-2 h. Filters were prehybridized for 1-2 h.
at 420C in a mixture containing 6 x SSC, 0.1% SDS,
0.1% sodium pyrophosphate, and 100 jg denatured
salmon sperm DNA/ml. A [32P]-labeled oligonucleotide probe was then added to the mixture, and hybridization continued for 6-18 h at the same temperature.
The hybridization mixture was recovered and frozen
and could be reused over a period of 2-3 half-lives
(4-6 wk).
Filters were rinsed three times in 6 x SSC and 0. 1%
SDS at room temperature to remove adhering radioactive material and then were washed two times in the
same solution for 10 min at the test temperature. Temperature in these washes was carefully monitored using a thermometer directly in the wash solution. To
minimize test-to-test variation the same thermometer
was always employed. After the final wash filters were
drained, mounted wet between sheets of thin plastic
film, and sealed to prevent drying. The filters were
exposed to X-ray film with intensifying screens at
- 700C for 3 h to several days, depending on the radioactivity of the bound probe.
Where possible, differential test temperatures were
established using test filters having known heterozygotes and homozygotes for each genotype. When no
homozygote for a particular mutant gene was available, as was the case for the mutations reported here,

1343

the best temperature was inferred from the behavior
of heterozygote samples. When practical, one set of
filters was always washed at 420C, to monitor possible differences in the amount of DNA on spots of the
same filter. These low-temperature filters could then
be rewashed at a different test temperature if the initial
results were unclear.
Restriction-Site Analysis

A reaction mixture containing 3 Ril React 2 buffer
(10 x ) (BRL), 2 gl of a fragment C PCR reaction
mixture, and 1 il of the BstE2 stock was taken to a
total of 30 Al with water. The digestion mixture was
incubated at 600C for 1 h. The reaction was stopped
with 5 p1 of gel-loading buffer IV (Sambrook et al.
1989, p. B24) and electrophoresed on a 1.2% agarose
gel with TAE buffer at 100 V until the dye front had
moved 7-8 cm. Fluorescent bands were photographically recorded under UV illumination, and DNA fragments were transferred to Hybond nylon membranes
by Southern blotting. After fixation of the nucleotide
fragments to the membrane by UV illumination and
heating, the membrane was hybridized with a labeled
exon 7 oligonuckotide (ARSA 35nc) and was washed
at 420C and radioautographed.
mRNA Analysis

Total RNA was prepared from confluent fibroblasts. After the medium was removed, cells were
rinsed with PBS and were harvested directly into
4 M guanidinium isothiocyanate by scraping. Cellular
debris were removed by centrifugation, and the DNA
was fragmented by shearing. Extracts were then purified by centrifugation through a cesium chloride cushion (Stein et al. 1989).
Nucleic acid content was initially estimated by measurement of the 260-nm absorbance, and apparently
equal amounts were spotted on a 1% agarose/0. 7%
formaldehyde gel and were examined by electrophoresis. Ethidium bromide fluorescence intensity on preliminary gels was sometimes used to adjust sample
volumes to equivalent RNA levels on analytical gels.
The gels were blotted onto Hybond nylon membranes
by standard northern blot methodology. After fixation
the filter was hybridized overnight with a freshly labeled human ARSA cDNA probe. Hybridization was
at 420C in 48% formamide, 10% dextran sulfate, 4.8
x SSC, 1 x Denhardt's solution, and 100 gg salmon
sperm DNA/ml. After hybridization, filters were
washed twice with 2 x SSC containing 0. 1% SDS for

1344

15 min at room temperature and twice with 0.2 x
SSC at 60'C for 30 min. Filters were drained, sealed
in thin plastic, and put up with X-ray film with intensifying screens for 1 to several days.
Site-directed Mutagenesis and Transient ARSA Expression
Site-directed mutagenesis was carried out by the
Eckstein method (Nakamaye and Eckstein 1986), in
which a S dCTP is used to decrease nuclease susceptibility of the newly synthesized mutant strand and
thereby improve the yield of mutant clones. BHK cells
at a density of about 5 x 105/6-cm Petri dish were
transfected with the expression vector pBEH (Artelt
et al. 1988) containing either the normal or the mutant
ARSA cDNA sequence. A calcium phosphate/glycerol shock procedure was employed (Kingston 1987).
After growth for 48 h to allow expression of the human ARSA, cells were harvested in the presence of
detergent. The ARSA was measured by a modified
Baum assay (Baum et al. 1959) and 13 hexosaminidase
with p-nitrophenyl N-acetylglucosamine (Fluharty et
al. 1970). Total protein was estimated by the Lowry
procedure (Lowry et al. 1951).
Results
Mutations

Two putative mutations were identified in the
cloned PCR fragments of this juvenile MLD patient.
Both were found in multiple clones of the same fragment and were confirmed in both coding and noncoding segments. One mutation was a T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 799, resulting in a change from
isoleucine to serine in exon 3 (designated E3P799).
The other mutation was a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 2195 (E7S2195). This occurs at the splice junction following exon 7 and is the first nucleotide of the
subsequent intron. The mutation results in an alteration in the splice-initiation signal. (Gene alterations
are designated with regard to the following: [a] location in gene structure, e.g., E3 = exon 3 or its immediately adjacent splice-recognition sequence; [b] type of
alteration, e.g., P = point mutation leading to amino
acid substitution; or S = mutation in splice-recognition sequence; and [c] number of initial nucleotide
in altered sequence, e.g., 799 = 799th nucleotide beyond start of initiation codon.) Sequencing-gel segments showing these mutations are presented in figure
2a and b.
The splice-site mutation (E7S2195) also results in

Fluharty et al.
the loss of a restriction-endonuclease cleavage site.
BstE2 and its isoschizomers recognize the sequence
G-G-T-N-A-C-C. The sequence CAG GGTAACC
CCT, which occurs in the normal sequence, is changed
to CAG GTTAACC CCT in the mutant.
Three BstE2 sites, two of which are in PCR fragment C, occur in the ARSA gene. Treatment of fragment C with BstE2 generates three subfragments
which are well resolved on agarose-gel electrophoresis. A new, larger subfragment was present when the
C fragment from this patient was evaluated. A similar
higher-molecular-weight band was seen on BstE2
treatment of the C fragment from the patient's father
but not on treatment of those from his mother and
sister. Three additional MLD patients showing the
larger restriction fragment were detected among 40
patients evaluated by this procedure. It was also possible to show the presence of the larger restriction fragment on Southern blots of these gels by using [32p]_
labeled oligonucleotide ARSA 35, which is specific for
a normal exon 7 sequence near the site ofthe mutation.
Only a single labeled fragment is generated from each
genotype. This latter method of detection should be
applicable to unamplified genomic DNA samples. The
results of these tests are presented in figure 3.

Specific Oligonucleotide Probes
Oligonucleotide probes specific for the two mutations were synthesized and used to survey appropriate
PCR fragments. Five additional individuals positive
for the point mutation in exon 3 (E3P799) were detected among the nearly 100 MLD patients. Two of
these five individuals were members of the patient's
family - i.e., his sister and mother. The father was not
positive. Two were individuals with adult MLD, but
neither was homozygous for this mutation. The fifth
individual suffered from juvenile MLD. One of the
adult patients also carried another recognized MLD
mutation (E2S609, termed "I" by Polten et al. [1991]),
which previously had been found only in late-infantile
and juvenile MLD patients. The putative second mutations in the other adult MLD and juvenile MLD
patients remain unknown.
Other than those identified by the restrictionenzyme survey, no individuals positive for the
E7S2195 mutation were detected. Again, only four
MLD patients in our sample carried this mutation. All
occurred in heterozygous combination with another
characterized MLD mutation. Except for the juvenile-onset proband, all others are late-infantile MLD
patients. Two of these also carried the E2S609 mu-

C

A
12

3

12

T

G
3

12

3

12

3
T

T

T
C
A
C
C
C
A
C
C
C

T
0
0

T~~~
C~~~

ACGT

G~~~~~~~
C
C

T
C
C
A
A

2Sequncingelgenn

at

79 ad 2195 I
T,

C

79i

at

799iAlfu
transversion at nucleotide ad2
s tegmnt shrtowng mutations atnulotie 9ad29.ToTtFiguameregi2 issequencedingg hel
coe

shown for clone 1, and only G is shown for clones 2-6. These were coding

mpl8 clones.

inesar

Fluharty et al.

1346

JV Li LI UKJVUK LI Li LI PRSI FAst MOLI AD
*

A_

i ] _ ~~~

~

~~~~~~~..d

i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i.

.1.
....,.......;

_~

.....

=~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
I

a*do

Figure 3
BstE2 endonuclease polymorphism due to E7S2195 mutation. Portions of PCR-amplified C fragments were digested with
BstE2, and the fragments were separated by agarose-gel electrophoresis as described in the text. The upper panel is a composite of bands
visualized by direct UV fluorescence in the presence of ethidium bromide. Gels were then blotted to nylon membranes and hybridized to
a [32p] oligonucleotide probe specific for nucleotides 2152-2170. The C fragment of the normal ARSA gene contains two BstE2 sites
generating fragments of roughly 180, 340, and 470 bp. The mutant provides only two fragments, one of roughly 180 bp and one of roughly
810 bp. The oligonucleotide probe binds to the normal 340-bp and the mutant 810-bp fragments. The propositus (PR) and his father (FA),
mother (MO), and sister (SI) are included in the composite, along with a variety of MLD patients of late-infantile (LI), juvenile (JY), adult
(AD), or unknown (UK) age at onset. Molecular-weight standards are labeled (st). The patient, his father, and two late-infantile-onset MLD
patients have the larger fragment indicative of the mutation, in addition to a normal 340-bp restriction fragment.

tation, while the third had a deletion in exon 8
(E8D2506; W. Bohne, K. von Figura, and V. Gieselmann, unpublished data). In addition, three normal
heterozygotes for this mutation were identified in the
families of two of the patients. Examples of SOP analyses for these two mutations are shown in figure 4a
and b. For a summary of the relationship of these
mutations to MLD type, see table 2.
mRNA Studies in Cells with the Splice-Site Mutation

Splice-site mutations often result in little or no
mRNA. While no cell line homozygous for the
E7S2195 mutation was available to test this issue directly, there were lines where this mutation was in
heterozygous combination with the E2S609 mutation.

The latter had been shown not to produce any 2.1-kb
mRNA for ARSA. Therefore, any 2.1-kb mRNA observed in the heterozygous E2S609/E7S2195 cell lines
would have to have come from the gene with the
E7S2195 mutation. Northern blots of RNA isolated
from normal fibroblasts, from patients with the
E2S609/E2S609, and from E2S609/E7S2195 genotypes were hybridized first with the ARSA cDNA and
subsequently with a lysosomal acid phosphatase (LAP)
cDNA. Autoradiographic films were quantified densitometrically to compare ARSA and LAP mRNA levels
in the mutant cells (figure 5). This experiment confirms that alleles carrying the E2S609 splice-site mutation do not produce detectable levels of ARSA mRNA.
It is surprising that the presence of the E7S2195

1347

Arylsulfatase A Mutations
A

B

C

44 45

44 45

44 45

N
P1MO
Li
P1 FA
PD

2
3
4
5

Jv

U

6

Li

PD
PD
PD

7
8

AD

Jv

U

P7 JV

U

AD

PsAD
N
P. AD
MLD?
Li
Li
Li

U
Jv

Li
PI JV

1

9
10
11

PD

P1 Si

B

A
49

Table 2

C

AD

AD

AD

U

Jv

AD

PD

P4 U

PD
P1 FA

PDh
Uh
P1 MO

Jv

AD

Jv

U

Jv

7

U

U

8

P4 SI
P4 MO
P4 FA

Jv

P3

Jv

U
PidJV

AGE AT ONSET

3-16 Years >16 Years
0-2 Years
(adult)
(late infantile) (juvenile)

GENOTYPEa

...
E3P799/E7S2195
...
E3P799/E2S609 .......
... 1
E3P799/? ................
2......
E7S2195/E2S609
1
E7S2195/E8D2506

1
...

......

...

1

1
2

...

.
...

...
.

a
The E2S609 mutation is that designated "I" by Polten et al.
(1991). The E8D2506 mutation is a 10-bp deletion in exon 8 (W.
Bohne, K. von Figura, and V. Gieselmann, unpublished data).

49 50

5

Genotype and MLD Clinical Form in Patients with
E3P799 and E7S2195 Mutations

1

2
3
4

5

peptides could be detected either in metabolic labeling
experiments or by an ELISA which could detect less
than 3% of normal ARSA CRM values (data not
shown).

6

9

U

10

U

11

Specific oligonucleotide probe analyses for E3P799
Figure 4
and E7S2195 mutations. Appropriate PCR fragments (A or C) were
denatured and directly slot blotted onto nylon membranes and were
fixed, and hybridization with [32P]-labeled oligonucleotides was
evaluated. The composite figures have been assembled so that normal and mutant probes are adjacent. A representative selection of
informative filter segments has been assembled from the nearly 150
individuals surveyed in this manner. MLD patients are labeled either
according to type (LI, JU, or AD) or as unknown (MLD?). Patients
carrying mutations identified in the present study are labeled (P,P7). Members of patients' families are indicated (P"FA = father;
PnMO = mother; and PnSI = sibling). Other genotype indicators
shown are are normal (N) and PD. An "h" following the designator
indicates a heterozygous carrier. Top, Filters probed with oligonucleotides ARSA 44nc and ARSA 45nc corresponding, respectively,
to normal and mutant sequences around E3P799 mutation. Bottom, Filters probed with oligonucleotides ARSA 49nc and ARSA
50nc corresponding, respectively, to normal and mutant sequences
around E7S2195.

splice-site mutation does not appear to depress synthesis or stability of the 2.1-kb transcript believed to be
the template for the bulk of the ARSA synthesis.
Given the apparently normal level of mRNA from
the E7S2195 allele, we tested for anti-ARSA crossreactive material (CRM) in fibroblasts of a patient
with the genotype E2S609/E7S2195. No ARSA poly-

Site-directed Mutagenesis
The point mutation in exon 3 (E3P799) was introduced into a human ARSA cDNA clone (Stein et al.
1989) and was inserted into the expression vector
pBEH (Artelt et al. 1988). This was used to transfect
BHK cells under conditions where the unmodified
gene construct was strongly expressed. Cultures
transfected with the vector containing the E3P799 mutation produced only about 5% of the ARSA activity
increase obtained with an unaltered ARSA cDNA insert. Cell protein and IB hexosaminidase activity were
unaltered. These data are summarized in table 3. No

Table 3
ARSA Transient-Expression Studies

VECTOR TYPEa

Activity of
i HexosARSA
Protein aminidase
(mg/ml) (mUnit/mg) (mUnit/mg)

Control .......... ....... 3.05
Control + normal ARSA ..... 3.20
Control + ARSA/E3P799 ... 3.15

18.7
18.8
17.5

2.4
13.8
3.0

The E3P799 mutant sequence was placed into the normal ARSA
cDNA by site-directed mutagenesis, and both normal and mutant
sequences were subcloned into the expression vector pBEH. These
vectors were then used to transfect nearly confluent cultures of BHK
cells. After 48 h cells were harvested and assayed for ARSA and
3-N-acetyl hexosaminidase activities. Enzyme levels are compared
with those in a BHK culture transfected with an insert-free vector.
a

Fluharty et al.

1348
0)
o

00

O
0)

C

(0

cow
CM

CO

-

w

0)

0)

Nv

N

CD

COi

w

0

0~~~~~'~CO)
Z w w
(I)

co
CM

0
w

C]
-J

Size, kb
4.8- -o
3.7 -sm

ASA/LAP 2.3 2.2 1.2 1.5
Figure 5
ARSA messenger RNA in cells from late-infantileMLD patients carrying E7S2195 mutation. Total RNA from
cultured fibroblasts was isolated, electrophoretically fractionated,
and blotted onto a nylon membrane (see text). The blot was hybridized with [32P]-labeled ARSA cDNA and was evaluated autoradiographically. Subsequently, the membrane was washed free of the
ARSA cDNA and rehybridized with a LAP cDNA probe and again
was autoradiographed. Autoradiographic signals were evaluated
densitometrically for comparison of signal ratios. Sizes of the RNA
species hybridizing with ARSA cDNA are indicated. Cell lines from
a normal control, from two patients with mixed heterozygosity for
the E7S2195 and E2S609 mutations, and from one patient with
mixed heterozygosity for the E7S2195 and a deletion mutation
(E8D2506) are compared with those from a cell line homozygous
for the E2S609 mutation. Only the latter is deficient in the ARSA
2.1-kb mRNA product. ARSA/LAP ratios for cDNA densitometric
signals are presented below the corresponding electrophoretic lanes.
onset

alteration other than the expected T-to-G transversion
observed when the sequence of the expressionvector construct was examined over the region of the
mutation.

was

Discussion

Two new mutations in the human ARSA gene have
been recognized in a juvenile MLD patient. One, des-

ignated E3P799, was a point mutation resulting in the
replacement of an isoleucine by serine in exon 3. This
alteration appears to substantially reduce, but not
completely eliminate, enzyme activity. When the
E3P799 mutation was introduced into the cDNA for
normal human ARSA and was transiently expressed
in BHK cells, about 5% of the control activity was
induced. This low residual expression is consistent
with this mutation occurring in individuals with lateonset (juvenile or adult) forms of MLD.
E7S2195, the second mutation in this patient, altered an intron-exon splice-site recognition sequence.
This change resulted in a complete absence of functional ARSA. There was also no evidence for any
immuno-CRM. However, there did not appear to be
a decrease in mRNA production. Since this mutation
leads to a complete absence of enzyme in combination
with other ARSA-null mutations, it would be expected
to produce late-infantile MLD in homozygotes as well.
Both of the newly described mutations were relatively rare in the MLD population evaluated, but neither was unique to the family in which it was discovered. The E3P799 mutation occurred in four of the
nearly 100 MLD patients surveyed. Thus, this mutant
allele accounts for roughly 2% of this MLD gene pool.
The E7S2195 mutation was also detected in four
MLD patients, accounting for another 2%. These mutations are, therefore, more than 10-fold less frequent
than those described elsewhere (Polten et al. 1991).
Homozygotes for the new mutations would be expected to be quite rare in a randomly breeding population and might only be encountered in cases of consanguinity. The phenotypic characteristics of these
mutations must, at present, be inferred either from the
properties of heterozygote combinations with other
MLD mutations or from site-directed mutagenesis
studies.
The gene carrying the E3P799 mutation was otherwise identical to the reference human ARSA gene sequence (Kreysing et al. 1990). The E7S2195 mutation
always occurred in combination with the E7P2162
polymorphism. The latter is a common polymorphic
variant of the human ARSA gene, occurring in nearly
one-half of the total gene pool evaluated. It is unlikely
that any further gene alterations are associated with
either of the two new MLD alleles. The entire coding
sequence and most of the intervening intron sequences
were examined, and no other reproducible sequence
variations were encountered (other than previously
noted corrections to the originally reported cDNA sequence [Kreysing et al. 1990]). Additional alterations

Arylsulfatase A Mutations
in control regions either preceding the coding sequences or following the polyadenylation signal cannot be excluded.
Both the independence of the E3P799 and E7S2195
mutations and their segregation with respect to the
exon 7 polymorphism were confirmed by the investigation of other family members. The patient's father
carried the E7S2195 mutation and the E7P2162 polymorphism, in addition to an ARSA PD allele. The
E3P799 alteration was found in the mother, while the
exon 7 polymorphism was absent. The patient's sister
had the E3P799 mutation, lacked the exon 7 polymorphism, and carried the ARSA PD gene as well. This is
summarized as a pedigree in figure 6.
It appears likely that the partial enzyme deficiency
associated with the E3P799 mutation results from a
combination of a lowered activity in the mutant enzyme and a decreased stability of that enzyme. The
site-directed mutagenesis results suggest that the mutant protein may have about 5% of the activity of the
normal enzyme in the synthetic substrate assay. The
residual activity toward physiological substrate in intact juvenile and adult MLD cell lines, however, is less
than 1% of that in the typical control. Moreover, cells
from an adult MLD patient heterozygous for this mutation and the null-activity E2S609 mutation have
been shown in an extensive series of studies to be responsive both to leupeptin and to E64 stimulation of
functional cerebroside sulfatase activity (A. L. Fluharty, K. K. Tsay, and R. Fisher, unpublished data).
Since thiol protease inhibitors enhance enzyme activ-

PDaltertionsononeallE7S2195
This lteallash(E7P2162)

7

E3P799

Figure 6 Pedigree of patient Pi's family. The ARSA genotypes established for this family are shown. The father carries the
PD alterations on one allele and the E7S2195 mutation on the other.
This latter allele also has a neutral polymorphism, E7P2162, in
exon 7. The mother carries the E3P799 mutation on one allele; the
other allele has the normal reference sequence. The patient and his
sister both received the E3P799 allele from the mother. The patient
received the E7S2195 allele from the father, while his phenotypically normal sister inherited the PD gene.

1349
can be inferred that a portion of the overall
enzyme deficit is due to protease susceptibility of the
mutant enzyme.
Thus, the allele containing the E3P799 mutation
gives rise to a low but finite ARSA activity, and this
activity is sufficient to delay the onset of demyelination
and clinical symptoms. While we have no examples in
which two copies of this gene are present in the same
individual, we would expect this to result in adultonset disease. Two of the individuals heterozygous for
this mutation are adult MLDs (onset later than 16
years of age). In the index case the combination of this
mutation with one leading to a complete absence of
functional enzyme resulted in juvenile MLD. However, the other example of a combination of the
E3P799 mutation with a null-enzyme allele occurred
in an adult MLD patient who has survived into his
fifth decade. It is therefor possible that this mutation
results in a somewhat less severe enzyme deficit than
does the adult MLD-associated E8P2382 mutation
reported elsewhere (as "A" in a paper by Polten et al.

ity, it

[1991]).

In two cells line where both the E2S609 and the
E7S2195 mutations were present, no immuno-CRM
or functional ARSA activity could be documented.
Therefore, the E7S2195 splice-site mutation appears
to result in a complete absence ofenzyme protein, even
though it supports a normal level of ARSA mRNA
synthesis. Reading through the intron between exons
7 and 8 would produce an altered reading frame in
exon 8 and a premature chain termination. Such a
transcript might still be processed to a poly A-tailed
mRNA, even though it would code for a severely altered and presumably unstable protein. Alternatively,
the mutation might lead to the elimination of the preceding exon (7) from the message. Further investigation of the ARSA mRNA produced by these cell lines
will be needed to evaluate these postulates.
This E7S2195 mutation would be expected to produce late-infantile MLD in a homozygote. Although
no such individual was encountered in our extensive
sample of MLD patients, this expectation was supported by the finding that, when this gene was in heterozygous combination with other null-ARSA mutations, late-infantile MLD resulted.
The two mutations described here fit, for the most
part, the simple genotype-phenotype pattern noted by
Polten et al. (1991). One results in a complete absence
of functional enzyme and thus gives rise to lateinfantile or juvenile MLD, depending on the nature of
the other allele. The other mutation causes an alter-

1350
ation in the ARSA sequence, which leads to both a
decreased enzyme activity and an enhanced susceptibility to proteolytic digestion. The mutant enzyme
from the E3P799-containing allele may be somewhat
more metabolically effective than that derived from
the "adult" mutation described by Polten et al. (1991).
However, this apparent difference could as well reflect
variations in the subcellular environments of individual cell lines. Future studies on such partially active
mutant enzymes, biosynthesized in permanently transfected expression systems, will allow detailed investigation of their properties and could aid in the design
of rational therapies for MLD patients carrying these
genes.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge Professor Norbert Herschkowitz of Bern, who provided the cell cultures and clinical
information on the index family. This work was supported
by National Institutes of Health grants NS-11665
TW-1520, by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant Gi
155/2-1, and by grants from the Fond der Chemischen Industrie and the United Leukodystrophy Foundation.

References
Artelt P, Morelle C, Ausmeier M, Fitzek M, Hauser H
(1988) Vectors for efficient expression in mammalian fibroblasts, myeloid and lymphoid cells via transfection.
Gene 68:213-219
Baum H, Dodgson KS, Spencer B (1959) The assay of arylsulfatase A and B in human urine. Clin Chim Acta 4:453455
Dubois G, Turpin JC, Baumann N (1975) Absence of ASA
activity in healthy father of a patient with metachromatic
leukodystrophy. N Engl J Med 293:302
Fluharty AL, Porter MT, Lassila EL, Trammell J, Carrell
RE, Kihara H (1970) Acid glucosidases in mucopolysaccharidoses fibroblasts. Biochem Med 4:110-120
Fluharty AL, Stevens RL, Kihara H (1978) Cerebroside sulfate hydrolysis by fibroblasts from a metachromatic leukodystrophy parent with deficient arylsulfatase A. J Pediatr 92:782-784

Fluharty et al.
Geiselmann V, Polten A, Kreysing J, von Figura K (1989)
Arylsulfatase A pseudodeficiency: loss of a polyadenylylation signal and N-glycosylation site. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 86:9436-9440
Kihara H, Ho CK, Fluharty AL, Tsay KK, Hartlage PL
(1980) Prenatal diagnosis of metachromatic leukodystrophy in a family with pseudo arylsulfatase A deficiency by
the cerebroside sulfate loading test. Pediatr Res 14:224227
Kingston RE (1987) Transfection of DNA into eukaryotic
cells. In: Ausubel FM, Struhl K, Smith JA, Seidman J.
Moore D, Kingston R. Brent R (eds) Current protocols in
molecular biology. Wiley, New York, pp 9.1.1-9.1.3
Kolodny EH (1989) Metachromatic leukodystrophy and
multiple sulfatase deficiency: sulfatide lipidosis. In: The
metabolic basis of inherited disease, 6th ed. Scriver CR,
Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D (eds) McGraw-Hill, New
York, pp 1721-1750
Kreysing J, von Figura K, Gieselmann V (1990) The structure of the arylsulfatase A gene. Eur J Biochem 191:627631
Lott IT, DulaneyJT, Milunsky A, Hoefnagel D, Moser HW
(1976) Apparent biochemical homozygosity in two obligatory heterozygotes for metachromatic leukodystrophy. J
Pediatr 89:438-440
Lowry OH, Rosebrough NJ, Farr AL, Randall RJ (1951)
Protein measurement with the folin phenol reagent. J Biol
Chem 193:265-275
Nakamaye KL, Eckstein F (1986) Inhibition of restriction
endonuclease Nci I cleavage by phosphorothioate groups
and its application to oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis. Nucleic Acids Res 14:9679-9698
Polten A, Fluharty AL, Fluharty CB, Kappler J, von Figura
K, Gieselmann V (1991) Molecular basis of different
forms of metachromatic leukodystrophy. N Engl J Med
324:18-22
SambrookJ, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T (1989) Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2d ed. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
Sanger F, Nicklen S, Caubon AR (1977) DNA sequencing
with chain terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
74:5463-5467
Stein C, Geiselmann V, Kreysing J. Schmidt B, Pohlmann
R. Waheed A, Meyer HE, et al (1989) Cloning and expression of human arylsulfatase A. J Biol Chem 264:12521259

