ORIGINAL ARTICLES

Primary Adhahn Deficiency as a Cause of
Muscular Dystrophy in Patients with
Normal Dystrophn
Asa Ljunggren, BS,” David Duggan, BS,” Elizabeth McNally, MD, PhD,t Kevin B. Boylan, MD,$
Carlos H. Gama, MD,§ Louis M. Kunkel, PhD,? and Eric P. Hoffman, PhD”

In our experience, more than half of muscular dystrophy patients show a primary dystrophinopathy. The underlying
cause of muscular dystrophy in the vast majority of patients with normal dystrophin is unknown. Recently, a French
family with 4 young siblings showing a muscular dystrophy of unknown progression was shown to have a primary
deficiency of “adhalin,” the 50-kd dystrophin-associated protein. Here we report the screening of the entire adhalin
coding sequence in muscle biopsy specimens from 30 muscular dystrophy patients to (1) determine whether adhalin
deficiency is restricted to the French population, (2) determine the incidence of adhalin deficiency in muscular dystrophy patients, and ( 3 ) characterize the clinical features and mutations in adhalin-deficient patients. We identified a
single African-American girl with childhood-onset muscular dystrophy and adhalin gene mutations. We found her to
be a compound heterozygote for two different mutations of the same amino acid (Arg98Cys; Arg98His), one of which
was previously identified in the French family. Our results suggest that primary adhalin deficiency in patients with
muscular dystrophy but normal dystrophin is relatively infrequent, and that adhalin-deficient patients are not restricted to the French population.
Ljunggren A, Duggan D , McNally E, Boylan KB, Gama CH, Kunkel LM, Hoffman EP.
Primary adhalin deficiency as a cause of muscular dystrophy in patients
with normal dystrophin. Ann Neurol 1995;38:367-372

Duchenne muscular dystrophy is one of the most common early lethal genetic diseases and is the major form
of muscular dystrophy. The primary biochemical defect in Duchenne muscular dystrophy is dystrophin deficiency 11, 2 J, while patients with the clinically milder
Becker muscular dystrophy have abnormal dystrophin
131. Becker dystrophy shows a wide range of presenting symptoms, and can range in severity from symptoms slightly milder than Duchenne dystrophy to
asymptomatic elevation of creatine kinase (CK) 141 (A.
Morrone, E. Zammarchi, R. C. Hoop, et al., unpublished data, 1995). The causative gene is on the X
chromosome, and as such, the large majority of patients are hemizygous males. Recent studies showed
that isolated cases of myopathy in females can also be
caused by dystrophin deficiency due to preferential inactivation of the normal X chromosome in female carriers [S-S}.
We analyzed dystrophin quantity and quality in
1,803 muscle biopsy specimens from unrelated muscu-

lar dystrophy patients (1,35 1 males, 452 females). We
found that 40% of males show marked dystrophin deficiency (Duchenne muscular dystrophy), 29% of
males show abnormal dystrophin (Becker muscular
dystrophy), and 26% of females are symptomatic female carriers of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (both
isolated and familial). Thus, using our referral population, approximately 57% (1,030/1,803) of muscular
dystrophy patients show dystrophin abnormalities as
the cause of their disease. The underlying cause for
dystrophy in the 43% of patients with normal dystrophin is not known, although most with isolated disease are presumed to have an inherited autosomal recessive disorder. These patients may be classified into
the genetically heterogeneous categories of severe
childhood autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy
(SCARMD) (McKusick 253700), or limb-girdle muscular dystrophy {9}.
The dystrophin protein is a major component of the
membrane cytoskeleton in muscle fibers and is thought

From the “Departments of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry,
Human Genetics, and Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA; ?Howard Hughes Medical InStltUte,
Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA; $Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville,
Jacksonville; and $University Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, Jacksonville, FL.

Received Feb 13, 1995, and in revised form Mar 15 and Apr 18.
Accepted for publication Apr 19, 1995.
,
Address correspondence to D~ Hoffman, BST ~ 1 2 1 1university
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 5261,

Copyright 0 1995 by the American Neurological Association

367

to impart structural integrity to contracting muscle (see

1101 for review). There are many other components of
the membrane cytoskeleton, however, and these have
become known as “dystrophin-associated proteins”
1111. These other proteins become candidates for causing muscular dystrophy in patients showing normal
dystrophin in muscle biopsy specimens. The 50-kd
dystrophin-associated glycoprotein adhalin has provoked particular interest because of reported deficiency in most muscle biopsy specimens for patients
with SCARMD [12].
To define the molecular etiology of non-dystrophinrelated muscular dystrophy using the candidate gene
approach, analysis of genomic D N A or muscle biopsy
messenger RNA (mRNA) can be done to search for
causative mutations. Alternatively, immunohistochemical analysis can be done on muscle biopsy specimens
to identify biochemical deficiencies. Imrnunohistochemical protein analysis is perhaps the most rapid;
however, it has become clear that the dystrophinassociated proteins frequently show secondary deficiencies. For example, most of the patients with an
adhalin deficiency have shown linkage to markers on
chromosome 13. Since the adhalin gene maps to chromosome 17, these patients must have a defect in some
other, as yet unidentified protein Cl2- 141. Moreover,
Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients show adhalin
deficiency despite a primary defect in dystrophin [l5].
Detection of mutations in genomic D N A from peripheral blood will provide more specific data than biochemical studies, but can be cumbersome if the exonl
intron structure is complicated. Primary adhalin deficiency, related to homozygosity for adhalin gene mutations as opposed to less-s,pecific reduction in the
amount of the protein in muscle, was found to cause
a childhood-onset muscular dystrophy in 4 young siblings in a French family {16:\.
Here we report analysis of mRNA in muscle biopsy
specimens from 30 muscular dystrophy patients to
screen for primary defects in the adhalin gene, and
demonstrate that 1 in 30 patients has mutations in the
adhalin gene. We show that adhalin deficiency is present in non-French populatiions. Moreover, our data
suggest that the phenotype of patients showing primary
ad halin deficiency is consistent with a childhood-onset
muscular dystrophy, and that primary adhalin deficiency in patients with muscular dystrophy with normal
dystrophin is relatively rare.
Materials and Methods
Dystrophin Protein Analysis
Diagnostic muscle biopsy specimens were frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen, and received at the University
of Pittsburgh for dystrophin analysis. Cryosections of each
specimen were immunostained with affinity-purified polyclonal sheep antidystrophin antibodies

terminal of the central rod domain) El), and with d10
(cystein-rich domain) 1171. Parallel cryosections were stained
with hematoxylin and eosin ( H + Ej for histopathological
analysis. Dystrophin immunoblotting was done on all males
who showed some positive dystrophin signal on immunofluorescence, as previously described [7I using a monoclonal
antibody directed against the central rod domain [1@.

Patient Selection
Thirty muscular dystrophy patients met all of the following
criteria: serum CK level in excess of 1,000 IU/liter (normal
< 200 IUlliter), excellent preservation of the muscle determined by H + E staining, and normal dystrophin. Two additional specimens from Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients were included as negative controls. All showed
inheritance patterns consistent with an autosomal recessive
disease. All patients carried a diagnosis of muscular dystrophy. The average serum CK level for the 30 patients was
17,807 IUiliter. Based on clinical phenotype and histopathology, patients were grouped into three categories: severe,
neonatal-onset congenital muscular dystrophy (3 patients);
childhood-onset muscular dystrophy (SCARMD) (11 patients); and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (16 patients).

R N A Isolation and Comp~‘ementaryD N A Pvoduction
R N A was isolated from 10 to 240 mg of muscle by the
guanidinium thiocyanate procedure and purified by cesium
chloride centrifugation [ 19}. R N A integrity and concentration were estimated by agarose gel electrophoresis.
Adhalin mRNA sequence I131 (Genbank accession no.
L34355) was used to design all polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) primers. Reverse transcription (RT) was performed
by mixing 50 pmol of sequence-specific primer (ADH4R: 5’
CAGCAATTGGTGAGCAGAG) to approximately 2.5 pg
of total R N A that was dissolved in 18 pl of diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC) water. After heating to 68°C for 2 minutes and
chilling on ice, the reaction was brought up to a volume of
50 p1 containing 1 x RT buffer (50 mM Tris-hydrochloric
acid {Tris-HCI); 8 mM magnesium chloride [MgCl,]; 30 mM
potassium chloride [KCI); 1 mM dithiothreitol; p H 8.5
[2OoC]; Boehringer Mannheimj, 24 units of AMV reverse
transcriptase (Boehringer Mannheim), 80 units of RNase inhibitor (Boehringer Mannheim), and 800 pM each dNTP
(Perkin Elmer Cetus). Complementary D N A (cDNA) synthesis was done at 42°C for 1 hour.

RT-PCR Amplification of cDNA and Screening for
Putative Mutations
PCR primers were designed against the adhalin mRNA sequence 1131 using PRIMER (M. J. Daly, S. E. Lincoln, E. S.
Lander, unpublished, 1991). Overlapping PCR products of
the cDNA were generated using the following PCR primers:
region 1 [(nt (-36) - nt 315), A D H l F : 5‘ CTCTGTCACTC
ACCGGGC and A D H l R : 5‘ GACCTCAATGACCTGGA
GC); region 2 [(nt 273 - nt 611), ADH2F: 5‘ CTCTGCCAC
CCCAGAAGAT and A D H 2 R 5 ’ GAGGCAGAACCCAC
CTTAAT); region 3 [(nt 514 - nt 993), ADH3F: 5‘ CTGCT
CAACGTCACCTCTG and ADH3R: 5‘ CATCTGGATGT
CGGAGGTAG); and region 4 [(nt 950 - nt 1375j, A D H 4 F
5’ AGGGAAGGCTGAAGAGAGAC) and primer 1200-

368 Annals of Neurology Vol 38 No 3 September 1995

1221 [lb}. Nucleotide (nt) numbering corresponds to the
translation reading frame deduced from McNally and colleagues 1131. PCR were performed on a Perkin Elmer Cetus
model 480 thermal cycler with 2 p1of R T reaction; 200 FM
each dNTP; 20 pmol each primer; 1 X PCR reaction buffer
(50 mM KC1, 1.5 mM MgCl,, 10 mM Tris-HCl CpH 8.31,
and 0.001n/, gelatin [wt/vol]); 0.3 units AmpliTaq D N A
polymerase (Perkin Elmer Cetus); and 0.05 pl of (a’*P)dATP (3,000 Ci/mmol, ICN) in a total volume of 12.5
pl. Cycling conditions for primer sets A D H l X and ADH3X
were 94°C for 3 minutes, followed by 35 cycles of 94°C for
1 minute, 55°C for 2 minutes, 72°C for 3 minutes, with a
final extension at 72°C for 10 minutes. Cycling conditions for
primer sets ADH2X and ADH4X were 94°C for 3 minutes,
followed by 35 cycles of 94°C for 1 minute, 65°C for 4
minutes, with a final extension at 65°C for 10 minutes
For single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP)
analysis [20), an aliquot of the labeled PCR product was
mixed with an equal volume of stop solution (95% deionized
formamide, 10 mM sodium hydroxide, 0.05% each of bromophenol blue and xylene cyanol dyes). The samples were
denatured at 94°C for 3 minutes, rapidly cooled on ice, and
then loaded onto a 5% (49: 1) nondenaturing polyacrylamide
gel containing 0.5 X TBE. Electrophoresis was performed at
30 W at 4°C for 6 hours in 0.5 x TBE. For heteroduplex
analysis, 5 IJ.I of the labeled PCR product was heated to 95°C
for 3 minutes and cooled slowly to 37°C over a period of 30
to 60 minutes. One microliter of 6 x gel loading buffer (AT
Biochem) was added and the samples were electrophoresed
on a 1 x Hydrolink-MDE gel (AT Biochem) in 0.6 x TBE
for 16 hours at 800 V. SSCP and heteroduplex gels were
transferred to Whatmann 3MM paper, dried, and autoradiographed at -80°C for 24 to 72 hours.

Sequencing OJ Conformers and Restriction
Enzyme Analysis
Aberrant conformers were excised from dried gels, placed
in 100 pl of deionized water, and allowed to elute overnight at 37°C. Five microliters of eluate were reamplified
using the original amplification primers. Amplified products
were purified using Microcon-50 microconcentrators (Amicon). Approximately 200 ng of the retentate was used in
sequencing reactions. Sequencing of the double-stranded
PCR product was performed using TAQuence Cycle Sequencing (USB). Primers were end-labeled with [y-32P)ATP
(6,000 Ci/mmol, DuPont). Product from the sequencing reaction was analyzed using a 6% (19:l) denaturing polyacrylamide gel. Aberrant conformers were sequenced in both directions.
PCR reamplification of the suspected mutations in our patient was as described above except (1) 0.05 pl (w3*P)dATP
was not included and (2) primers used for PCR were Stephfwd: S‘TCCACATCACCTACCACGC and A D H 1R. Restriction enzyme digestion was carried out by incubating 4
pl of PCR product, 1 X reaction buffer (Sau.3AI or NEBuffer
4), 100 pg/ml of bovine serum albumin and 10 units of
restriction enzyme ( S a 3AI or NluIII, New England Biolabs)
in a volume of 10 kl at 37°C for 2 hours. Products were size
fractionated on a 3% (1% Sigma, 2% NuSieve) agarose gel
containing 0.1 pgiml of ethidium bromide.

Case Report
The female proband (Fig 1) was born to nonconsanguineous
parents by a vaginal vertex delivery with a birth weight of
7 Ib 4 oz. Pregnancy and delivery were uncomplicated but
hospitalization for several days in the neonatal period was
required for transient lethargy. Motor milestones were delayed, with walking beginning at 18 months. Language was
delayed and school performance was poor. Karyotype was
normal. Transaminase elevation, recognized before age 5,
was attributed to otherwise undocumented hepatic disease.
Frequent falls occurred in early childhood and she never
ran well. Examination elsewhere at age 8 showed mild limbgirdle weakness, lordotic posture, waddling gait, and inability
to rise from a squat without assistance. Serum CK (two determinations) level was 12,000 to 14,000 IU/liter. Electromyography showed rare fibrillations and short-duration, lowamplitude, polyphasic motor unit potentials. Left quadriceps
biopsy specimens obtained at age 11 showed “myopathic
changes consistent with muscular dystrophy.” Leg length discrepancy was noted in early childhood (right leg longer than
left), and scoliosis was recognized at age 15.
At age 16 school performance was at a fifth grade level.
Motor testing showed Medical Research Council (MRC)
grade 3 hip-girdle weakness except that hip extensors were
MRC 4. Knee extensors were MRC 3. Right anterior leg,
and right elbow flexorlextensor and shoulder girdle muscles
were MRC 4, and were somewhat stronger on the left. Results of motor examination of the face, neck flexors, forearms, and hands were normal. She showed a lordotic posture
and an unsteady, waddling gait. Tendon reflexes were trace
at the knees but otherwise were normal. The remainder of
the neurological findings were normal. The right thigh and
leg were mildly hypertrophied with associated mild right
heel-cord shortening. There were no large joint contractures.
Electrocardiogram was normal. CK level was 12,075 U/liter
(normal, 5 3-269).
Neurological examination of the proband’s mother revealed normal results. H e r CK level was 150 Uiliter (normal,
53-269). The proband’s father was not available for examination, but showed no neuromuscular symptoms by patient
report. Family history was negative for neuromuscular disease or mental retardation.

Results
RNA was prepared from muscle biopsy specimens
from 30 patients with normal dystrophin (3 with
neonatal-onset congenital muscular dystrophy, 11 with
childhood-onset muscular dystrophy, 16 with adultonset limb-girdle muscular dystrophy). All had inheritance patterns consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance, and all had serum CK levels higher than
1,000 IU/liter. RNA was reverse transcribed into
cDNA using an adhalin-specific primer, and four overlapping regions of the adhalin coding sequence amplified by RT-PCR. Each region of each patient was tested
by both SSCP (two electrophoresis conditions) and by
heteroduplex analysis.
Two patients showed aberrant SSCP conformers,
both in the second region of the coding sequence

Ljunggren et al: Adhalin Deficiency

369

A

B

Fi g 1 . The female proband at age 17. Lordotic posture (A)and
scapubr uinging (B) are apparent. The right lou)er extremity
is 2 cm longer than the left. Mild relative enlargement of the
right quadriceps and calf is present. but h$cuft to appreciate
in these photographs.

( + 2 7 3 bp to +611 bp relative to the translational
initiator codon) (Fig 2). Olnly 1 of these patients
showed heteroduplex format ion over the same region
(see Fig 2). No other region of adhalin showed aberrant conformers or heterocluplex formation by any
assay.
The aberrant SSCP conformers seen in both patients
were excised from dried gels, and directly sequenced
by cycle sequencing. One patient (described above)
(see Fig 2, lane 2) showed two different mutations of
the same arginine 98 amino acid codon (Arg98Cys;
Arg98His). The second patient (see Fig 2, lane 5 )
showed a base change that did nut change an amino
acid and was therefore considered a polymorphism.
Although this polymorphism was not observed in any
of the other patients or 2 control subjects (63 alleles

370 Annals of Neurology

Vol 38 No 3

tested), this patient was a black female, and thus this
may be a polymorphism endemic to the black population, which was not adequately sampled in our patient
population. It is important to note that these mutations, as well as the previously reported mutations, are
predicted to lie in the extracellular domain of adhalin,
and that they may interfere with binding of components of the extracellular matrix.
The two mutations seen in the arginine 98 codon
were in the proband, an African-American girl with a
childhood-onset muscular dystrophy. It was important
to determine whether the two mutations of the same
codon in this patient were on the same adhalin gene
(in cis), or if there was a single mutation in each of the
patient’s two adhalin genes (in trans). The two base
changes altered restriction sites of the Sau3AI and
NhIII enzymes. Thus, by restriction enzyme digestion
of RT-PCR product from the patient’s muscle we determined that one of the base changes was on one copy
of the adhalin gene, and the second mutation on the
second copy (compound heterozygote) (Fig 3).

September 1995

~~

1

2

3

4

Control

5 6 7 8

Patient

SSCP
-Z?O
-231

-154
-134

Heteroduplex

*

Fig 2. Screening of putative mutations of the adhalin gene by

single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and heteroduplex analysis of patient musrle biopsy R N A . The complete coding sequence of the adhalin gene was amplzfiedfrom muscle biopsy R N A from 30 muscular dystrophy patients in four
ooerlapping fragments, and tested for possible mutations by
SSCP and heteroduplex analysis. Shown is an example of SSCP
and heteroduplex analysis of reuerse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR)products of the second region (273 bp
dotownstream of the ATG through 61 1 bp). The patient sample
shown in lane 2 shows aberrant SSCP conformers and a heteroduplex (arrows) in the same RT-PCR fragment. This patient
has t t u o different mutations in this region (C292T. G293A
relati%'et o the previously reported translational reading frame
f13)), U S shown by sequence analysis. and is the adhalindeficient patient described in this report. Lane 5 shorn a different patient with an abermnt SSCP conformer, but no heteroduplex over the same region. This patient WUJ found to have a
polymorphism in this region that did not change an amino
acid.

Discussion
Patients with Tunisian autosomal recessive muscular
dystrophy lack adhalin, but these patients show linkage
to chromosome 13 markers: The adhalin gene is on
chromosome 17 C12-141. In addition, Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients also show adhalin deficiency,
although the primary defect in Duchenne dystrophy is
dystrophin. Thus, biochemically defined adhalin deficiency most often reflects an abnormality secondary to
some other primary defect. For these reasons, we
chose to directly screen for adhalin gene mutations
using RNA isolated from patient muscle biopsy specimens. Another advantage of genetic screening is that
patients with adhalin gene mutations could appear to
have normal adhalin protein by immunochemical analysis of biopsy specimens (for example, many Becker
dystrophy patients show normal dystrophin by immunostaining, yet have an underlying dystrophinopathy).
We studied 30 muscular dystrophy patients: j with
neonatal-onset congenital muscular dystrophy, 11 with
childhood-onset muscular dystrophy (SCARMD), and

75

+
Fig 3. The proband, with childhood-onset muscular dystrophy,
shows different mutations of the same amino acid codon in her
two adhalin genes (compound heterozygote),Shown is restriction
enzyme analysis of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCRI products from a normal control subject and from
the patient described in this report. The normal sequence around
the arginine 98 codon is digested with Sau3AI but not NlalII
(control). The ArgY8His mutation creates an NhIIl site, while
the Arg98Cys mutation destroys the normal Sau.3AI site (patient). If the two mutations were in the same copj of the adhalin gene i n the patient, then both the Sau3AI and the
NlalIf sites would be destroyed, leaving all RT-PCX products of
the mutant allele undigested with both enzymes. Thix analysis
prooes that the two mutations are in trans, and thus the patient is a compound heterozygote.

16 with early adult-onset muscular dystrophy (limbgirdle muscular dystrophy). We detected adhalin gene
sequence changes in a single patient: A 16-year-old
(at the time of writing) African-American girl with a
childhood-onset muscular dystrophy. We believe that
the two sequence changes are causative mutations for
the following reasons. First, the change on one of her
adhalin genes, Arg98His, is identical to one of the mutations found in the previously reported French family
with adhalin deficiency. Second, the other change,
Arg98Cys, alters the same amino acid to a cysteine,
which is a less conservative change than the Arg98His
change. Finally, we showed that these two changes occur on different alleles of the girl's adhalin genes by
restriction enzyme analysis of primary cDNA from her
muscle biopsy specimen. This result proves that she is
a compound heterozygote.
W e believe that we have detected all adhalin mutations in our patient cohort for the following reasons.
First, patients are expected to show mutations on both
adhalin genes, and we found no patients with single
mutations that would suggest that we missed a base
change. Second, according to current knowledge 12 I],
the sensitivity of PCR-SSCP analysis is approximately
90% for 300- to 450-bp fragments using a single gel
system. As only 1 mutation-positive patient was deLjunggren er al: Adhalin Deficiency

371

tected, there is a very small probability that a patient
positive for a gene mutation was missed in our screen.
Finally, we used three different gel systems, further
increasing the likelihood of detecting all sequence
changes.
The adhalin-deficient patients reported to date show
a generally similar disorder. 'The previously reported
French family C223 showed a childhood-onset muscular
dystrophy with significant muscle weakness noted at
about the age of 10 years, calf hypertrophy, and CK
levels 25 to 88 times normal. Our patient developed
clinically evident muscular dystrophy by at least age 8,
although transaminase elevation (likely due to muscle
disease) was noted by age 5. Her presentation is similar
to that of the French patients., although limb hypertrophy in our patient was unilateral and involved the thigh
as well as the calf. Her scoliosis seemed related both to
muscle disease and to leg length discrepancy; skeletal
deformity was not reported in the French patients. Intellectual impairment also was not reported in the
French siblings, and we suspect that in our patient it is
unrelated to adhalin deficiency because adhalin mRNA
has not been detected in the central nervous system
[ 131. However, additional case reports are needed to
resolve this issue. There was no evidence of cardiac
involvement by physical examination or electrocardiography in our patient.
Our results suggest that adhalin deficiency may be
limited to patients with a childhood-onset muscular
dystrophy (SCARMD). None of the 16 patients with
adult-onset Becker-like (limb-girdle muscular) dystrophy who were tested showed adhalin gene abnormalities. Although the numbers tested are still low, our
results suggest that adhalin abnormalities as the cause
of muscular dystrophy in patients with normal dystrophin are relatively infrequent. Unfortunately, patient testing for primary adhalin deficiency is problematic: Biochemical testing is not diagnostic due to the
high frequency of secondary deficiencies, and gene
testing is currently limited to technically difficult and
expensive muscle biopsy IRNA or DNA studies.
The accelerating identificatilon of muscle membrane
cytoskeleton proteins should result in an increased
understanding of the molecular basis of the heterogeneous SCARMDilimb-girdle group of muscular dystrophy patients.
A. Ljunggren and D. Duggan contributed equally to this work. This
work was supported i n part by grants from the National Institutes
of Health (NS28403to E. P. H., NS21740 to L. M. K.). W e would
like to thank Drs Robert Cruse and LJma P. Kalyan-Raman for referring the patienr determineci to have a polymorphism.

References
I . Hoffman EP, Brown R H , Kun kel LM. Dystrophin: the protein
product ot the Duchenne muscular dystrophy locus. Cell 1987;
5 I :019-92X

172

Annals of N e u r o l o g y

Vol 38 No 3

?
-.

Hoffman EP. Fischbeck K H , Brown R H , et al. Dystrophin characterization in muscular biopsies from Duchenne and Becker
muscular dystrophy patients. N Engl J Med 1988;318:1363-

I368
3. Hoffman EP, Kunkel LM, Angeliiii C, et al. Improved diagnosis
of Becker muscular dystrophy by dystrophin testing. Neurology
1980;39: 101 1- 1017

4. Comi G P , Prelle A, Bresolin N, et al. Clinical variability in
5.

0.

7.

a.

9
10.

11.

12.

13ecker muscular dystrophy: genetic, biochemical and immunohistochemical correlates. Brain 1994;117:1-14
Arikawa E. Hoffman EP, Kaido M, et al. The frequency of
patients having dystrophin abnormalities in a limb-girdle patient
population. Neurology 1W1;4 1: 1491-1 496
Minetti C, Chang H W , Medori R, et al. Dystrophin deficiency
in young girls with sporadic myopathy and normal karyotype.
Neurology 199I ;41: 1288- 1291
Hoffman EP, Arahata K, Minetti C, et al. Dystrophinopathy in
isolated cases of myopathy in females. Neurology 1992;42:967975
Pcgoraro ER, Schimke R N , Garcia C, et al. Genetic and biochemical normalization in female carriers of Duchenne muscular
dystrophy; evidence for failure of dystrophin production in dystrophin competent myonuclei. Neurology 1995;45:677-690
G r i g s RC, Menciell JR, Miller RG. Evaluation and treatment
of myopathies. Philadelphia: Davis, 1995:128-1 3 1
Partridge TA. Pathophysiology of muscular dystrophy. Br J
Hosp Med l991;49:26-30
1br.aghimov-Beskr~)vnay~~
0 , Ewdsti JM, Leveik CJ, er al. Primary structure of dysrrophin-associated glycoproteins linking
dystrophin to the extracellular matrix. Nature 1992;355:696702
htarsumura K, 'Tome FMS, Collin H, et al. Deficiency of the
iOK dystrophin-associate~iglycoprotein i n severe childhood autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy. Nature 1992;359:320-

322
1 3 . McNally EM, Yoshida M, Mizuno Y, et al. Human adhalin is
alternately spliced and the gene is located on chromosome
17q21. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:9690-9694
I 4 Bcn Othmane K, Ben Hamida M, PeIkdk-Vdnce MA, et al.
Linkage o f Tunisian autosom31 recessive Duchenne-like muscular dystrophy to the periccnrrtimeric region of chromosome
1 iq. Nature Genet I992;2:?lj-jl7
15. Ohlendieck K, Matsumura K, Ionasescu VV, et al. Duchenne
iiiuscular dystrophy: deficiency of dystrophin-associated protcins in the sarcolemma. Neurology 1991;43:795-800
10. Roberds SL, Leturcq F, Allamand V, et al. Missense mutations
i n the adhalin gene linked to autosomdl recessive muscular dystrophy. Cell 1994;78:625-633
1 7 . Koenig M, Kunkel LM. Detailed analysis of the repeat domain
of dystrophin reveals 4 potential hinge regions that may confer
lkxibility. .J Biol Chem 1990;265:4~60-4566
18. Nicholson LVB, Davison K, Falkous G, et al. Dystrophin in
skeletal muscle. 1. Western blot analysis using a monoclonal
antihody. J Neurol Sci 1989;94:125-136
19 Sanibrook J, Fritsch EF. Maniatis T. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. 2nd ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Lahoratory Press, 19x9
2 0 . Orita M, Suzuki Y, Sekiya T, Hayashi K. Rapid and sensitive
clerection o f point mutations and D N A polymorphisrns using
the polymerase chain reaction. Grnoinics 1989;5:874-879
2 1 Hayashi K. PCR-SSCP: a simpie and sensitive method for detection of mutations in genomic D N A . PCR Methods Appl 1991;l:
i1-38
_) _I Romero N B , Tome FMS, Leturcq F, et al. Genetic heterogeneity of severe childhood autosomdl recessive muscular dystrophy
with adhalin (50 kDa dystrophin-associated glycoprotein) deficiency. CK Acad Sci Paris 1994;117:70-76

S e p t e m b e r 1995

