HUMAN MUTATION 1:113-I23 (1992)

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Screening for Mutations by Expressing Patient
cDNA Segments in E, cofk
Homocystinuria due to Cystathionine
P-Synthase Deficiency
Viktor Koiich and Jan I?. Kraus.
Department of Pediutrics, University of Colortdo School of Medicine, Denver, Cokmdo 80262
Communicated by Davd Valk

Deficiency of cystathionine P-synthase (CBS) causes the most common form of inherited homocystinuria. We developed a simple CBS expression system in E. coli to screen for pathogenic mutations in
affected individuals. Portions of patient cDNAs were amplified by PCR and used to replace the
corresponding segments of normal human CBS cDNA in the bacterial expression plasmid pHCS3.
Hybrid CBS was expressed in E. coli and the segments of patient's cDNA which extinguished CBS
activity were sequenced t o identify the mutation. The first study of a pyridoxine-responsive patient
using this screen revealed that of the clones which contained either the middle or the 3'-portion of his
cDNA, about half were devoid of catalytic activity. Subsequent sequencing of the affected segments
confirmed a compound heterozygosity for a maternal T R 3 p Ctransition (1278T) and for a paternal
A - C transversion in the intron 11 splice acceptor. T h e latter mutation leads to an in-frame deletion
of exon 12 (nt 1224-1358, amino acids W408 to (3453). This bacterial expression system proved to
be a rapid screening method for localizing pathogenic mutations in CBS, allowing us to sequence the
affected portions of mutant cDNA within 7-10 days of harvesting cultured fibroblasts.
0 1992 Wilev-Liss, Inc.

,

KEY WORDS: Homocystinuria, Human, Cystathionine P-synthase, Enzyme/deficiency Mutatiodscreen-

ing, Protein expression, E. coli, Inborn errors of metabolism, Allosteric regulators, SAdenosyl-L-methionine, Pyridoxine, Recombinant DNA, Chromosome 2 1. R N A splicing,
Splicing error, Mutational analysis, Alleles

INTRODUCTION
Cystathionine P-synthase (CBS)' [L-serine hydro-lyase(adding homocysteine); EC 4.2.1.221, a
pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-dependent enzyme, plays a
key role in the transsulfuration of homocysteine in
eukaryotes (Mudd et al., 1989). Under physiological circumstances, about half of the intracellular
homocysteine is transsulfurated yielding cysteine.
The remainder is remethylated to methionine in
the methionine cycle (Finkelstein and Martin,
1984a). AdoMet regulates homocysteine flux
through these branches. A t low levels of AdoMet
remethylation of homocysteine is unimpaired. Elevated levels, on the other hand, inhibit remethylation pathways and increase the irreversible
transsulfuration by stimulating CBS (Kutzbach and
Stockstad, 1971; Finkelstein and Martin, 1984b;
Finkelstein et al., 1975).
Q

1992 WILEY-LISS. INC.

Deficiency of CBS is the most common cause of
inherited homocystinuria in humans. The symptoms and signs of this condition are well characterized. They include dislocated optic lenses, skeletal disorders, mental retardation, and often fatal
thromboembolism (Mudd et al., 1989). Transsulfuration is blocked, resulting in the accumulation
of homocyst(e)ine and often methionine together
with depletion of cysteine and cystathionine in
body fluids. In about half of the affected patients,
these symptoms can be alleviated by pyridoxine

Received March 18, 1992 accepted April 6, 1992
'To whom reprint requestdconespondence should be addressed.
'Abbreviations: CBS,cystathioninea-synthase;PAGE, polyacylamide gel electrophoresis; PLP, pylidoxal 5'-phosphate; SDS. sodium dodecyl sulfate.

114

K02ICH AND KRAUS

administration. The rationale for this treatment is
based, in part, on the observation that some of the
mutant CBS proteins bind pyridoxal 5’-phosphate
less avidly than normal(Lipson et al., 1980).
Normal CBS is a homotetramer of 63 kDa subunits (Skovby et al., 1984a,b); its gene resides on
human chromosome 21 at 922.3 (Skovby et al.,
1984d; Munke e t al., 1988). T h e rat CBS gene is
20-25 kbp long, its coding region is organized in
17 exons, and the transcript is alternatively spliced
yielding four mRNA isoforms (Swaroop et al.,
1992). Human CBS pre-mRNA yields two mRNA
isoforms which differ from each other only in the
3’-untranslated regions. The human amino acid
sequence is highly conserved with the rat and the
genomic organization appears to be conserved as
well (Kraus, unpublished). We showed previously
that CBS mutations do not usually alter the subunit size; however, the intracellular CBS concentrations are generally markedly reduced (Skovby et
al., 1984~).
These studies suggest that the majority
of the synthase genetic defects are missense rather
than nonsense mutations or internal deletions.
None of these mutations has been examined at the
molecular level. To facilitate these studies and to
more rapidly screen for mutations, we developed
an E. coli expression system based o n the vector
pKK 388.1.
Human CBS mRNA, obtained from patient cell
lines, can be cloned as a cDNA copy either in toto
or in part into this expression vector, allowing for
both the separation of parental alleles and preliminary localization of the pathogenic mutation
site(s). Separation of the parental alleles further
allows us to examine the putative association of
heterozygous CBS deficiency and premature arterial disease (Ueland and Refsum, 1989; Malinow,
1990; Clarke et al., 1991). We now report the
successful development of an E. coli screening system for human CBS mutations. We further report
employing this method to determine the location
and nature of the first pair of human CBS mutations described to date.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Enzymes and DNA Modification

Restriction endonucleases were purchased from
New England Biolabs. The 5’ ends of restricted
cloning cartridges were dephosphorylated with calf
intestinal alkaline phosphatase (Boehringer Mannheim Corp. ) according to the manufacturer’s suggested procedure. Fragments of DNA were inserted
into cartridges using T, DNA ligase obtained from
Promega following standard conditions (Ausubel

FIGURE 1. Expression plasmid pHCS3 and derived cartridges.
The complete circle at the top of the figure signifies the bacterial expression plasmid pHCS3, containing the entire coding region of human CBS cDNA. Broken circles, below, represent the expression cartridges prepared to receive the
,, trplloc fusion proappropriate patient cDNA inserts. P
moter; HUCBS, full length coding region of human CBS
cDNA.

et al., 1989). When necessary, protruding 5‘ ends
were made blunt by extending the 3’ end with
Klenow fragment DNA polymerase (Boehringer
Mannheim Corp.) (Ausubel et al., 1989). Taq
DNA polymerase was purchased from Promega.
Normal Human CBS Expression Plasmid

Plasmid pKK 388.1 (courtesy Dr. J. Brosius, Columbia University, New York, NY) was used for all
expression experiments (Brosius, 1988). The polylinker XmaI site was destroyed after digestion by
backfilling and religating. The coding region of the
normal human liver CBS cDNA (Kraus et al., unpublished) was amplified by PCR using primers PI
and P6. T h e product was phenol extracted, Centricon 100 purified (Tahara et al., 1990a), restricted with NcoI and KpnI, purified with Strataclean (Stratagene), and ligated into the NcoIIKpnI
cut and dephosphorylated pKK 388.1 ( X m a - ) vector. E. coli competent cells DH5aF’IQ (BRL) were
transformed with the expression plasmid designated pHCS3 (Fig. 1, top) and a single colony
used for large plasmid preparation (Ausubel e t al.,
1989).
Construction of Patient cDNA
Screening Plasmids

Three expression cartridges were prepared by
cutting the pHCS3 plasmid within the CBS coding
region using the following pairs of restriction enzymes: NcoIIPmlI, XmaIIBstXI, and BstXIIKpnl for

SCREENING FOR MUTATIONS BY E. COLI EXPRESSION
2 5 0 bp

H

xma I
I

uv?

Pml I
I

Bstx I
I

p-- cDNA

ATG

TGA

Nco I
P1
I

Digest

I
BstX I

Inserts

NP

XB

1

BK
FIGURE2. Preparation of patient CBS inserts. The long line
represents CBS cDNA, the length of 250 base pairs is indicated by the length of the bar at the upper left of the figure.
Restriction sites used for these preparationsare indicated by
the enzyme names. The initiation (1) and terminationcodons
(1656) are represented by ATG and TGA, respectively. The
open bars represent PCR products prepared with primers
indicated by the black rectangles (PI through P6). The primers used to prepare these fragments were:

ATCCCACCATGGGTTCTGAGACCCCCCAGGCA
GAAGTG-)
TACGATCGATTGTGAGAATTGGGGAITTCGTT (P2)

CGTAGAATTCCCCTATGGTCAGAATCAACAAG (P3)
TACGATCGATCGTTGCTCTTGAACCACTTG (P4)
CGTAGAATTCAGTGGGCACGGGCGGCACCA (P5)
TACGGGTACCAGCGCTCCGGACTTCACTTCTGG (P6)
All sequences are read left to right from the 5' to the 3' ends.
Underlines indicate artificial Ncol (Pl) and Kpnl (P6) sites.
The two letter designations below each of the inserts refer to
the enzyme pairs used to restrict the PCR fragments, indicated on the arrows above.

the NP, XB, and BK cartridges, respectively (Fig.
1, bottom). The dephosphorylated cartridges were
gel purified (SeaKem GTG agarose, BRL) and recovered from the gel using glass beads (GeneClean, Bio 101).
To prepare patient cDNA inserts, fibroblast
mRNAs were isolated as previously described (Skovby et al., 1 9 8 4 ~ )First
.
strand cDNAs were synthesized (Kraus et al., 1985) and portions of the
cDNAs were amplified by PCR as described previously (Tahara et al., 1990a,b). The strategy for the
preparation of inserts is depicted in Figure 2. PCR
products were phenol extracted, Centricon 100
purified (Tahara et al., 1990a), digested with the
appropriate pairs of restriction endonucleases, then
purified using Strataclean (Stratagene).
To complete the CBS screening plasmids, the
purified cartridges and patient cDNA inserts were

115

ligated as described earlier. Blunt end ligations
were carried out in presence of 7.5% of polyethyleneglycol 8000. T h e transformed DH5aF' IQ E.
coli (BRL) were isolated o n LB agar plates containing ampicillin. Both individual colonies and pools
of colonies were used for expression experiments
and DNA sequencing. Colonies were pooled to
minimize the artifacts arising from misincorporation during PCR amplification of the target regions. Additionally, heterozygosity was readily apparent in the DNA sequences of the pools and
subsequently could be verified in individual colonies.
Expression of CBS in E. coli
Bacterial cultures, 24 ml, were grown in SOB
medium (Sambrook e t al., 1989) to a turbidity of
-0.5 at 600 nm prior to induction with isopropylP-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG, BRL). Expression
of CBS was induced for 1 hr following addition of
0.33 mM IPTG. Cells were collected by centrifugation and washed once with phosphate-buffered
saline. T h e pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of 30
mM potassium phosphate (pH 6.0) then sonicated
for 80 sec at 50% duty cycle with power setting of
3-4 in an ice/brine bath using a model W-225
sonicator (Heat-Ultrasonics Inc. ). Cell lysates
were cleared by centrifugation (14,OOOg for 10
min) and assayed for synthase activity or subjected
to immunoprecipitation. CBS assays were performed essentially as described earlier (Kraus,
1987), with some modifications (see Results). Protein was determined according to Lowry (Lowry et
al., 1951). Specific activity was expressed in units
per mg protein (1 unit = 1 nmol of cystathionine
formeahr).
For Western analysis, CBS was immunoprecipitated with rabbit antihuman CBS antibodies and
S. aurew (Immunoprecipitin, BRL) (Kraus e t al.,
1983). The isolated CBS was subjected to SDS/
PAGE and electroblotted onto a nitrocellulose
membrane ( Towbin e t al., 1979). Prior to use, the
antiserum probes were preabsorbed with E. coli lysates to eliminate nonspecific cross-reactivity
(Sambrook et al., 1989). T h e membrane was incubated in 5% nonfat dry milk, washed with PBS,
and incubated with the preabsorbed rabbit antirat
CBS antibodies. To visualize the location of CBS,
'251-labeled protein G was bound to the immunocomplexes followed by autoradiography of the blot
at -80°C.
Other Methods
Plasmid preparations were made using the dual

SDS method (Ausubel et al., 1989). DNA se-

116

KOZICH AND KRAUS

quences were determined by the dideoxy method
(Sanger e t al., 1977) using Sequenase 2.0 (USB).
Human Cell Lines

Cultured skin fibroblasts from a control (2056),
one CBS-deficient patient (366), and his mother
(367) and father (368) were used for all studies.
The patient is a mildly affected Ashkenazi Jewish
male presently in his late twenties with dislocated
lenses. He exhibits normal psychomotor development. His homocysteinemia and homocystinuria
normalized after pyridoxine treatment despite the
complete absence of CBS activity in his fibroblasts. Pulse experiments employing [3H]leucine
detected no CBS subunits following immunoprecipitation and SDS-PAGE in his fibroblast extracts. In vitro translation of the patient’s and parental mRNAs, o n the other hand, clearly
revealed the patient’s CBS subunits (Skovby e t al.,
1984~).One, of apparently normal size, was inherited maternally; the other, much shorter, originated paternally.

RESULTS
Properties of Human CBS in E.coli Lysates
Bacteria transformed with the wild-type human

cDNA construct pHCS3 express CBS. The size
(63 kDa) of its subunits is indistinguishable from
normal human fibroblast CBS subunits (Fig. 3).
The expression product reacts with both antihuman and antirat CBS antibodies. The enzymatic
activity of normal human CBS in the E. coti lysates
was comparable to that of human liver (200 U/mg
protein) (Kraus and Rosenberg, 1983). A number
of bacterial factors interfered with the standard assay conditions for CBS. These factors were later
found to include the consumption of both the substrate and the product. Increasing amount of bacterial protein in the assay led to a sharp decline of
net cystathionine production as well as consumption of serine in the assay as compared to assays
containing fibroblast extracts (Fig. 4A). The effect
of these interfering reactions was largely eliminated by limiting the amount of bacterial protein
in the assay and by adding cystathionine to the
reaction mixture (Fig. 4B).
Mammalian CBS activity is stimulated by
AdoMet in tissue extracts (Finkelstein et al., 1975;
Koracevic and Djordjevic, 1977). AdoMet activates synthase by lowering its K, for homocysteine
(Roper and Kraus, 1992). We decided to evaluate
the effect of AdoMet o n the enzyme expressed by
transformed E. coli. Referring to Figure 5, it is apparent that 0.5 mM AdoMet stimulates CBS ac-

FIGURE 3. Western analysis of normal human CBS expressed
in E. coli. Lanes: HF 2056, human fibroblast extract containing 336 pg protein and 9.2 U of CBS; pKK 388, €. coli lysate
from cells harboring the parent pKK388.1 plasmid, 156 pg
protein, 0 units; pKWHCS3, E. coli lysates from cells containing the CBS expression plasmid, pHCS3, 156 pg of protein. 6U of CBS.

tivity 3.5 fold. Kinetic analysis (see inset in Fig. 5)
reveals that the enzyme exhibits an activation constant (Kact) of 15 pM. These results suggest that
human CBS retains AdoMet control after it is expressed in E. coli.
Based o n all these results, the incubation conditions for CBS in E. coli lysates were optimized as
follows: Tris-HC1 (pH 8.6), 100 mM; serine, 2.5
mM; [I4C]serine (- 1500 c p d n m o l ) ; homocysteine, 15 mM; BSA, 0.5 mg/ml; dithiothreitol, 1.5
mM; AdoMet, 0.5 mM; pyridoxal5’-phosphate, 1
mM; and bacterial lysate, 20 p1 (- 100 pg of
protein). The reaction was incubated for 4 hr at
37°C in a total volume of 200 pl.
Functional Screen for Mutations in a
Homocystinuric Individual

Having prepared a bacterial expression plasmid
for human CBS and optimized the assay conditions
for the enzyme in bacterial lysates, we next turned

SCREENING FOR MUTATIONS BY E. COLI EXPRESSION

117

61

100

1

I
0

L

100

1

200

300

400

500

AdoMet (yM)

protein [pgl

FIGURE 5. Activation of human CBS by S-adenosyl-Lmethionine. CBS was assayed in lysates of pHCS3-transformed E. coli. Each point refers to the activity, represented
by the ordinate, found at the concentration of AdoMet, depicted on the ordinate. The inset displays a reciprocal plot of
these data, revealing an apparent K,, of CBS for AdoMet
being 15 pM.

31-609, XB and BK inserts corresponded to nt
413-942 and 943-1646, respectively, of the patient cDNA (Fig. 2). PCR of NP and XB segments
yielded products of the expected lengths, however
PCR of BK segment yielded two fragments, one
130 bp shorter and about 5-fold more abundant

-

than normal (data not shown).
0

200

400

600

protein [pgl
Serine and cystathionine consumption in bacterial
lysates. (A) CBS assays were performed with varying
amounts of protein indicated on the abscissa. At the end of
the incubation, the substrate and product (serine and cystathionine) were separated, quantitated, and their sums indicated on the ordinate. Symbols refer to the origin of each
extract: A, human skin fibroblast; E. coli harboring pKK
388.1; 0, E. coli harboring pHCS3. (B)CBS assays were
performed as described in the Materials and Methods section. The abscissa indicates the amount of bacterial protein
from cells expressing pHCS3. The quantity of cystathionine
formed during incubation is indicated on the ordinate. The
symbols represent the activities found when the incubation
mixture included 0 mM (m), 2 mM (A), and 4 mM ( 0 ) unlabeled cystathionine.
FIGURE 4.

.,

our attention to using this preparation for the detection and analysis of human CBS mutations.
In order to find the pathogenic mutations in the
patient's CBS, three PCR amplified segments of
the coding region of his cDNA were used to replace the corresponding segments of the normal
sequence in pHCS3 expression cartridges, described earlier (Fig. 1). NP insert represented nt

Absence of a segment activity as an indication
of mutation

Hybrid human CBS, containing portions derived from patient's cDNA, was expressed in E.
coli. Typically 8 individual colonies as well as pools
of as many as 400 colonies were assayed. Clones
harboring the patient's NP segment exhibited normal CBS activity both in individual colonies (7 of
8 clones) as well as in the pool of colonies (98%of
control activity) (Table 1). On the other hand,
about half of the colonies (3 of 7), containing the
XB segment, had CBS activity. This observation
corresponds well with the depressed activity (40%)
when a mixture of these transformants was compared with the control. Expression of the patient's
BK segment yielded 4 individual clones with activity out of 18 and the mixture of colonies had
29% activity of the control. The higher fraction of
clones with inactive CBS was evidently due to the
greater abundance of the shorter PCR product.
We concluded from these data that the patient
was compound heterozygous for pathogenic mutations in the middle (XB) and the 3'-coding (BK)
regions of the cDNA. Subsequently, DNA pre-

118

KOZICH AND KRAUS

TABLE 1. GBS Activities of

Hybrid Protein Expressed
in E. coli"

Segment
insertedb
NP

XB
BK

Fraction of
colonies with
CBS activitv

Mixed
culture
% control
activitv

Deduced
segment
zvaositv'

718
317
4/18

98
40
29

Aa,
Aa,

AA

"Hybrid CBS containingdifferent portions of patient's CBS cDNA
was expressed and assayed in single colonies lysates. Mixed cultures were expressed after combining the individual colonies from
the agar plate and assayed as described.
bAbbreviations in this column refer to cDNA inserts restricted
with the followingenzyme pairs: NP,NcollPmll; XB,XmollBstXI;
BK,BstWKpnl.
'Segment zygosity: A, normal allele; a,, defective paternal allele;
a2, defective maternal allele.

A

pared from the individual inactive colonies as well
as from the pools of colonies was sequenced.

DNA sequencing of the affected regions
DNA sequences of two individual XB clones
without CBS activity revealed the first pathogenic
mutation. The only mutation detected in these
colonies was a T,,,+C transition causing a I278T
amino acid change (Fig. 6A). Th'is mutation creates a new BsrI restriction site. Two clones with
normal CBS activity were also sequenced and only
the wild-type XB sequence was observed. Sequencing of the pool of colonies yielded nucleotides T
and C at the position 833 in equal amounts (data
not shown). This finding is consistent with patient's heterozygosity for this mutation. In addition, a synonymous mutation (Y233Y) at position
699 (C+T) was observed both in clones with and
without CBS activity.
The sequence of the inactive BK clones (n = 3)
revealed the presence of a 135 bp deletion (position 1224-1358 bp) (Fig. 6B) which resulted in a
45 amino acid residue in-frame deletion (W408 to
(3453). This deletion corresponds to exon 12 of
the rat CBS gene (Swaroop et al., 1992) and led us
to suspect a splicing error due to a mutation in
intron 11 or 12 as a primary cause for the exon
deletion.
Mutation analysis in the patient's parents

The maternal origin of the T,,,+C transition
was verified by subcloning, expressing and sequencing the mother's cDNA. Two clones harboring NcoI-BstXI portion of her cDNA contained
the mutation T833+C (Fig. 7A), which was previously demonstrated in the patient. The expression experiment was consistent with heterozygosity

B
FIGURE6. DNA sequences of PCR-amplified cDNA from patient 366. (A) Both strands of plasmid DNA from a single
bacterial colony harboring an enzymatically deficient
pHCSJ/XB-segment were sequenced from positions 630 to
940. Nucleotides 829 to 837 of the sense strand are shown,
the abnormal C in position 833 in place of a normal T is
indicated by the
(B)Both strands of plasmid DNA from
a single bacterial colony harboring the 135 base pair shorter,
enzymatically deficient pHCS3/BK-segment were sequenced.
The sequence derived from the junction of exon 11 and exon
13 is shown, indicating the absence of exon 12.

0.

(4nonexpressing clones out of 8 assayed). We concluded from the data that the T,,pC transition is
the maternally inherited mutation in the patient.
The suspicion of a splicing error led us to sequence the father's genomic DNA for intron l l
boundary mutations. Four of six clones sequenced
contained an A to C transversion in the splice
acceptor of intron 11 (Fig. 7B). The splice donor
exhibited an apparently normal consensus sequence. These data explain the previously observed exon 12 deletion by misdirected splicing. In
addition, paternal heterozygosity for this transversion is supported by the sequencing data.
Western analysis

To verify that CBS subunits were made in
clones without catalytic activity, we performed

SCREENING FOR MUTATIONS BY E. COLl EXPRESSION

119

B
FIGURE 7. Heterozygosity for mutations in patient’s parents.
(A) The maternal cDNA (cell line 367)was amplified by PCR
in the 5’ coding region between the Ncol and BstXI sites,
subcloned, expressed, and sequenced. DNA sequences were
compared from DNA isolated from a colony containing normal maternal CBS cDNA (367A) and from another containing the abnormal allele (367a,) also of maternal origin. The
represents the sense-strand muantisense strand symbol,
tation, confirming maternal origin of the 1278T mutation in
her son. (B)Patient’s father genomic DNA (800 ng), cell line

368, was amplified using primers ACGATCGATCGATGGTGTGCCCACAGGTGA and CGTAGAATTCCTGAGCGACAGGTGGATGC, upstream and downstream, respectively.
The EcoRI and Clol restricted PCR fragment was subcloned
into a similarly prepared Bluescript vector (Stratagene) under conditions described in Methods. The 3’ end of intron 11
and first 3 nucleotides of exon 12 in the antisense strand are
represents the sense strand mutation A-C in the
shown:
consensus splice acceptor. 368A, wild-type allele; 368a,, allele with mutation.

Western analysis on lysates of E. coli containing
the hybrid CBS. The results of analysis are shown
in Figure 8. CBS subunits were detected in all lysates, however, a reduced amount of the immunoreactive material was found in the clones harboring
plasmid with the I278T mutation. Clones expressing the shorter protein with deleted exon 12
yielded approximately as much immunoreactive
material as the controls. These results suggest that
the polypeptide containing I278T mutation is less
stable than either the normal control or exon 12
deleted mutant protein in the E. coli system.

trophoresis (Myers et al., 1985b), chemical cleavage at mismatches (Cotton et al., 1988), and, finally, single-strand conformation polymorphism
analysis (Orita e t al., 1989). Once the aberrant
fragment is identified, the mutation is verified by
sequencing. These methods detect both the pathogenic mutations as well as the normally occurring
polymorphisms. Eventually, the detected changes
need to be tested for pathogenicity by expression in
E. coli (Gregersen et al., 1991) or mammalian cells
(e.g., Reichardt et al., 1992). Our approach to
screening for mutations in patients with homocystinuria starts with the expression of a hybrid
CBS cDNAs in E. coli; hybrid cDNAs consist of
portions derived from patient’s cDNA in the context of otherwise normal sequence of the expression pHCS3 plasmid. Absence of the enzyme activity is considered as a marker for pathogenic
mutations within the investigated cDNA segment.
Although expression of rat and human cDNA in
eukaryotic cells was successfully accomplished in

0,

DISCUSSION
The common approach to identification of disease causing mutations usually involves screening
at a level of genomic DNA or cDNA. There are
several methods which can detect a single base
substitutions in single or double stranded DNA
segment. These include RNAse sensitivity assay
(Myers et al., 1985a), denaturing gradient gel elec-

0

120

KOzlCH AND KRAUS

FIGURE 8. Western andysis of hybrid CBS expressed in E.coli.
Lysates were prepared from bacteria expressing different hybrid constructs originatingfrom each of patient 366‘s alleles.
Vectors containing BK segments from each allele are represented in the left panel (250 pg bacterial protein). The right
panel depicts CBS expressed by vectors containing the XB
segments from each of the patient’s alleles (500 pg bacterial
protein). The capital A refers to regeneration of the normal,
functional CBS subunit in the expression system. Symbols a,
and a, refer to the deletion and substitution mutations found
in the patient.

our laboratory (Swaroop et al., 1992; Roper and
Kraus, 1992), the simple, rapid prokaryotic expression system presented here is superior for screening
purposes. This bacterial system allows us to start
sequencing of the affected DNA region within 710 days since harvesting patient’s fibroblasts.

Features of the Normal Human CBS Synthesized
in E. coli
The 63-kDa human CBS subunits synthesized in
E. coli were indistinguishable in size from human
skin fibroblast CBS. Proteolysis of normal CBS was
not observed in E. coli lysates; this is in sharp contrast to the profound proteolytic activation observed in liver homogenates (Skovby e t al.,

1984b).
Catalytic activity of CBS produced by E. coli is
well preserved, however, linearity was not found
between activity and lysate content in the incubation mixture; on the contrary, activity sharply decreased with increasing amounts of bacterial protein. This most probably results from serine- and
cystathionine-consuming reactions inherent to
bacteria. After optimizing the assay conditions,
specific activity of normal human CBS expressed
in E. coli was similar to the activity of CBS in liver
lysates.

AdoMet is a strong activator of CBS; our experiments showed that CBS activity could be stimulated -3.5 times at an AdoMet concentration of
0.5 mM. The apparent K,,, for AdoMet was estimated to be 15 FM, which is two orders of magnitude lower than the K, for the substrates. The
concentrations of AdoMet in tissues (Hoffmann,
1979) are approximately of the same order, suggesting that AdoMet is a physiologically important
regulator of CBS activity.
Expression of eukaryotic proteins in E. coli
sometimes yielded functionally active proteins
with the appropriate tertiary structure (Linard et
al., 1988; Franke et al., 1990). In other cases, the
expression yielded inactive proteins due to the decreased solubility of improperly folded eukaryotic
polypeptide (Marston, 1987) or the lack of posttranslational processing (Gonzalez-Gronow e t al.,
1990). Our studies of the human CBS produced in
E. coli revealed high catalytic activity, lack of proteolysis, and preserved AdoMet activation. This
suggests that the enzyme is effectively folded in
bacterial extracts. These first expression results are
a promising start for the large scale expression of
human CBS in E. coli for further structural and
functional studies.
One limitation of our system is the subcloning
strategy used. In order to create the NcoI site containing the ATG codon, the second codon was
changed from proline (CCT) to glycine (GGT).
This amino acid substitution did not appear to affect the CBS catalytic activity. Due to the design
of the PCR primers, nucleotides 1-30 and 16471656, representing the 5’ and 3’ termini of the
CBS cDNA, escape testing. In those rare cases, in
which all segments of patient’s cDNA will be active in the expression experiment, the 5’ and 3’
termini can be tested by direct sequencing. The
other drawback of the system is the bacterial serine
and cystathionine consuming reactions which can
interfere with kinetic studies of the mutant proteins.

Patient Study
Patient 366 is a compound heterozygote as established by characterizing his CBS protein (Skovby et al., 1 9 8 4 ~ ) We
.
successfully subcloned, expressed, assayed, and sequenced segments from
both of this patient’s alleles. T h e activity data were
consistent with a compound heterozygosity for
pathogenic mutations in the XB (maternal) and
BK (paternal) segments, respectively.
Transition T,,,-+C was the only significant
mutation in the defective XB clones. Heterozygos-

SCREENING FOR MUTATIONS BY E. COW EXPRESSION

ity for this mutation was demonstrated both in the
patient and maternal fibroblasts. The transition
leads to a substitution of an isoleucine at position
278 by a more hydrophilic threonine. Because this
mutation does not affect the putative PLP binding
site (Swaroop et al., 1992), we suggest that occurrence of a hydrophilic threonine within a short
region of several hydrophobic amino acid residues
(I277-I-G-V280) may affect the CBS conformation or the interaction of the subunits in the normally occurring tetramer. This in turn may lead to
the instability of the CBS observed both in fibroblasts and the bacteria.
Deletion of 45 amino acids in the patient’s BK
segment corresponding to exon 12 of the rat CBS
gene (Swaroop et al., 1992) strongly suggests that
a splicing error had occurred. Heterozygosity for
this deletion was demonstrated in patient’s cDNA
by the presence of two differently sized BK inserts
following the PCR amplification (data not
shown). The paternal origin of this mutation was
demonstrated in the father’s genomic DNA with a
finding of both the normal (AG) and mutated
(CG) splice acceptor of intron 11. The A to C
transversion in the intron 11 consensus splice
acceptor can explain the observed deletion. Recognition of the intron 3’-splice site by the spliceosome is considered to be the first step in the premRNA processing (Robberson et al., 1990).
Mutation of this site in the patient can probably
prevent association of the spliceosome with the
intron 11 splice acceptor and cause subsequent
skipping of the adjacent exon 12. Since no other
mutation could be found in the entire BK segment
of patient’s cDNA, lack of CBS activity in the
clones should be ascribed to the missing exon 12.
Deletion of exon 12 could conceivably result
from either alternatively or misspliced mRNA;
however, several lines of evidence argue against
this possibility: First, we have not observed similarly shortened DNA segments in other cDNAs
tested to date, representing 20 separate CBS alleles. Second, the CBS subunits synthesized by the
patient’s fibroblast (Skovby et al., 1984c) were the
same size as those made by the transformed bacteria. Third, genomic sequencing disclosed the intron splice acceptor mutation which accounts for
the elimination of exon 12 in this patient’s
mRNA. Furthermore, Skovby found abnormal
CBS subunit size in only one line (366 of this
study) out of 16 CBS-deficient CRM+ fibroblast
lines. Taken together, these data suggest that exon
deletions due to missplicing are an uncommon
cause of homocystinuria in contrast to frequent oc-

121

currence of splicing errors in other diseases, e.g.,
in OTC deficiency (Carstens et al., 1991).
The availability of cell lines from both of the
patient’s parents greatly facilitated the present
study, allowing US to ascertain the parental origin
of each mutation. Typically, only the patient cell
line is available. In such cases, mutations identified in cDNA should be confirmed by analyzing
genomic DNA.
Bacteria transformed with constructs containing
either the paternal or maternal mutation produced
the corresponding product, however, reduced
amounts of CBS subunits were detected in the bacteria expressing the maternal mutation. These results suggest that mutant CBS, missing exon 12, is
more stable than the protein with the I278T mutation. Fibroblasts from the patient exhibited both
types of mRNA, yet contained no CBS immunoreactive protein. It is tempting to suggest that heterotetramers containing the maternal mutation are
readily degraded intracellularly. On the other
hand, eukaryotic cells edit defective protein extensively (Hershko and Ciechanover, 1982), so it may
not be necessary to evoke heterotetramers formation to explain the absence of immunologically
cross-reactive material in the fibroblast extracts.
Successful expression of human CBS cDNA in
E. coli from normal individual and from the first
patient with CBS deficiency proved the utility of
our approach to identify pathogenic mutations by
expression followed by DNA sequencing. We intend to exploit our expression system further to
evaluate individuals with homozygous or compound heterozygous CBS deficiency as well as patients with premature vascular disease, considered
by others to be heterozygous for CBS deficiency.
This expression screening system should be extremely useful to localize mutations involved in
other inherited human diseases, provided that the
gene product can be expressed in E. coli or yeast.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. Michael D.
Roper for critical reading of the manuscript, for his
help with the figures, and for continuous stimulating discussions, K. Bradley, Kim Le, and E. Kraus
for technical help, and V. Presley for typing the
manuscript.

REFERENCES
Ausubel FM, Brent R, Kingston RE, Moore DD, Seidman JG,
Smith JA, Struhl K (1989) Short Protocols in Molecular Biology. New York, Wiley.
Brosius J (1988) Expression vectors employing lambda-, trp-, lac-,
and Ipp-derived promoters. BiolTechnology 10:205-225.

122

KOZICH AND KRAUS

Carstens RP, Fenton WA, Rosenberg LE (1991) Identification of
RNA splicing errors resulting in human ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. Am J Hum Genet 48:1105-1114.
Clarke R, Dalv L, Robinson K, Naughten E, Cahalane S, Fowler
B, Graham I (1991) Hyperhomocysteinemia: an independent
risk factor for vascular disease. N Engl J Med 324:1149-1155.
Cotton RG, Rodrigues NR, Campbell RD (1988) Reactivity of
cytosine and thymine in single-base-pair mismatches with hydroxylamine and osmium tetroxide and its application to the
study of mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:4397-4401.
Finkelstein JD, Kyle WE, Martin JJ, Pick AM (1975) Activation
of cystathionine synthase by adenosylmethionine and adenosylethionine. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 6623-87.
Finkelstein ]I), Martin JJ (1984a) Methionine metabolism in
mammals. Distribution of homocysteine between competing
pathways. J Biol Chem 259:9508-9513.
Finkelstein JD, Martin JJ (1984b) Inactivation of hetaine-homocysteine methyltransferase by adenosylmethionine and adenosylethionine. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 118:14-19.
Fowler 8, Kraus J , Packman S, Rosenberg, L.E. (1978) Homocystinuria. Evidence for three distinct classes of cystathionine
P-synthasc mutants in cultured fibroblasts. J Clin Invest 61:
645-653.
Franke AE, Danley DE, Kaczmarek FS, Hawrylik SJ, Gerard RD,
Lee SE, Geoghegan KF (1990) Expression of human plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) in Escherichia coli as a
soluble protein comprised of active and latent forms. Isolation
and crystallization of latent PAI-1. Biochim Biophys Acta
1037:16-;!3.
Gonzalez-Gronow M, Grenett HE, Fuller GM, Pizzo SV (1990)
The role of carbohydrate in the function of human plasminogen: Comparison of the protein obtained from molecular cloning and expression in Escherichia coli and COS cells. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1039:269-276.
Gregersen N , Andresen BS, Bross P, Winter W, Riidiger N , Engst
S, Christensen E, Kelly D, Strauss AW, Kolvraa S, Bolund L,
Ghisla S (1991) Molecular characterization of medium chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency: Identification
of a 1 ~ s to
~ glu
’ ~ mutation in the MCAD gene, and expression
of inactive mutant enzyme protein in E. coli. Hum Genet 86:
545-551.
Hershko A, Ciechanover A (1982) Mechanisms of intracellular
protein breakdown. Annu Rev Biochem 51:335-364.
Hoffman DR, Cornatzer WE, Duerre J A (1979) Relationship between tissue levels of S-adenosylmethionine, S-adenosylhomocysteine, and transmethylation reactions. Can J Biochem 57:
56-65.
Koracevic D, Djordjevic V (1977) Effect of trypsin, S-adenosylmethionine and ethionine on L-serine sulfhydrase activity. Experientia 33:lOlO-1011.
Kraus JP (1987) Cystathionine P-synthase (human). Methods Enzymol 143:388-394.
Kraus JP, Hodges PE, Wiliamson CL, Honvich AL, Kalousek F,
Williams KR, Rosenberg LE (1985) A cDNA clone for the
precursor of rat mitochondria1 ornithine transcarhamylase:
Comparison of rat and human leader sequences and conservation of catalytic sites. Nucleic Acids Res 13:943-952.
Kraus JP, Kalousek F, Rosenberg LE (1983) Biosynthesis and mitochondrial processing of the P subunit of propionyl CoA carboxylase from rat liver. J Biol Chem 258:7245-7248.
Kraus JP, Rosenberg LE (1983) Cystathionine P-synthase from
human liver: Improved purification scheme and additional
characterization of the enzyme in crude and pure form. Arch
Biochem Biophys 222:44-52.
Kutzbach C , Stokstad, EL (1971) Mammalian methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase. Partial purification, properties, and inhi-

bition of S-adenosylmethionine. Biochim Biophys Acta 250:
459-477.
Linard CG, Mbikay M, Benjannet S, Lazure C , Seidah NG, Chritien M (1988) Correct processing and secretion of human prostatic secretory protein (PSP,,) in Escherichia coli. Gene 73:
479-487.
Lipson MH, Kraus J, Rosenberg LE (1980) Affinity of cystathionine P-synthase for pyridoxal5’-phosphate in cultured cells. A
mechanism for pyridoxine-responsive homocystinuria. J Clin
Invest 66: 188-1 93.
Lowry O H , Rosebrough NJ, Farr AL, Randall RJ (1951) Protein
measurement with the Fohn phenol reagent. J Biol Chem 193:
265-275.
Malinow MR (1990) Hyperhomocyst(e)inemia: A common and
easily reversible risk factor for occlusive atherosclerosis. Circulation 81:2004-2006.
Marston, F A 0 (1987) The purification of eukaryotic polypeptides
expressed in Escherichia coli In Glover DM, (ed): DNA Cloning, Volume 111: A Practical Approach. Oxford: IRL Press,
1987.
Mudd SH, Levy HL, Skovby F (1989) Disorders of transsulfuration
In Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D (eds): The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 6th
ed, 1989, pp 693-734.
Munke M, Kraus JP, Ohura T, Francke U (1988) The gene for
cystathionine P-synthase (CBS) maps to the subtelomeric region on human chromosome 21q and to proximal mouse chromosome 17. Am J Hum Genet 42550-559.
Myers RM, Larin Z, Maniatis T. (1985a) Detection of single base
substitutions by ribonuclease cleavage at mismatches in RNA:
DNA duplexes. Science 230:1242-1246.
Myers RM, Lumelsky N , Lerman LS, Maniatis, T. (198Sb) Detection of single base substitutions in total genomic DNA.
Nature (London) 313:495-498.
Orita M, Suzuki Y, Sekiya T, Hayashi K (1989) Rapid and sensitive detection of point mutations and DNA polymorphisms
using the polymerase chain reaction. Genomics 5:874-879.
Reichardt JKV, Belmont JW, Levy HL, Woo SLC (1992) Characterization of two missense mutations in human galactoseI -phosphate uridyltransferase: different molecular mechanisms
for galactosemia. Genomics 12596-600.
Robherson BL, Cote GJ, Berget SM (1990) Exon definition may
facilitate splice site selection in RNAs with multiple exons.
Mol Cell Biol 10:84-94.
Roper MD, Kraus J P (1992) Rat cystathionine P-synthase: Expression of four alternatively spliced isoforms in transfected cultured cells. Arch Biochem Biophys, in press.
Sambrook J , Fritsch EF, Maniatis T. (1989) Molecular Cloning: A
Laboratory Manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Vols 1-3.
Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR (1977) DNA sequencing with
chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82:
7212-72 16.
Skovby F, Kraus JP, Rosenberg LE (1984a) Biosynthesis and proteolytic activation of cystathionine P-synthase in rat liver. J
Biol Chem 259:583-587.
Skovby F, Kraus JP, Rosenberg LE (198413) Biosynthesis and proteolytic activation of cystathionine f3-synthase in rat liver. J
Biol Chem 259588-593.
Skovby F, Kraus JP, Rosenberg, LE (1984~)Homocystinuria: hiogenesis of cystathionine P-synthase subunits in cultured fibroblasts and in an in vitro translation system programmed with
fibroblast messenger RNA. Am J Hum Genet 36:452-459.
Skovhy F, Krassikoff N, Francke U (1984d) Assignment of the
gene for cystathionine P-synthase to human chromosome 21 in
somatic cell hybrids. Hum Genet 65291-294.

SCREENING FOR MUTATIONS BY E. COLI EXPRESSION
Swaroop M, Bradley K, Ohura T , Tahara T , Roper MD, Rosenberg LE, Kraus ]P (1992) Cystathionine P-synthase: gene organization and alternative splicing. J Biol Chem, 267:1145511461.
Tahara T, Kraus JP, Rosenberg LE (1990a) Direct sequencing of
PCR amplified genomic DNA by the Maxam-Gilberc method.
BioTechniques 8:366-368.
Tahara T, Kraus JP, Rosenherg LE (1990b) An unusual insertion/
deletion in the gene encoding the P-subunit of propionyl-CoA

123

carboxylase is a frequent mutation in Caucasian propionic acidemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:1372-1376.
Towbin H, Staehelin T, Gordon 1 (1979) Electrophoretic transfer
of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets:
Procedure and some applications. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
76:4350-4354.
Ueland PM, Refsum H (1989) Plasma homocysteine, a risk factor
for vascular disease: Plasma levels in health, disease and drug
therapy. J Lab Clin Med 114:473-501.

