J. Inher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992) 835-847
SSIEM and KluwerAcademicPublishers. Printed in the Netherlands

X-Linked Pyruvate Dehydrogenase
Subunit Deficiency in Heterozygous Females:
Variable Manifestation of the Same Mutation
H-H. M. DAHL1, L. L. HANSEN1, R. M. BROWN1., D. M. DANKS1,
J. G. ROGERS1 and G. K. BROWN2.
1Murdoch Institute Jbr Research into Birth Defects, Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne; 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Australia

Summary: Three female patients are described with pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH) deficiency as a result of mutation in the X-linked gene for the EI~
subunit of the complex. Two of these patients illustrate typical presentations of
PDH Elc~ deficiency, with severe neurological dysfunction, degenerative changes
and developmental anomalies in the brain, together with variable lactic acidosis.
The third patient extends the known spectrum of the condition to include mild
to moderate mental retardation and seizures in an adult. All three patients have
the same mutation in the PDH Ele gene. This mutation, a C-to-T substitution
in a CpG dinucteotide in amino acid codon 302 (designated R302C), results in
the replacement of arginine by cysteine at this position. The mildly affected
adult was the mother of one of the other patients, making this the first described
instance of mother-to-daughter transmission of a mutation causing PDH Ele
deficiency. The genetic basis of the variable expression of X-linked PDH Ele
deficiency in heterozygous females is discussed.
Defects in the Ele subunit account for the great majority of cases of pyruvate
dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency (McKusick 312170) (Brown et al 1987; Robinson et
al 1987; Wexler et al 1988). The clinical presentation of this condition is highly
variable with the recognized clinical spectrum ranging from severe lactic acidosis in
the newborn period to a chronic neurodegenerative disorder with major structural
abnormalities in the brain and minimal systemic acidosis (Brown et al 1988; Ho et
al 1989; Robinson et at 1989; Brown GK et al 1989). Neuropathological findings
include both degenerative changes (cerebral atrophy, cystic lesions in the brainstem
and basal ganglia) and developmental anomalies (including agenesis of the corpus
callosum and absence of the medullary pyramids) (Chow et al 1987).
In addition to variability in clinical presentation, there is also considerable
5iochemical heterogeneity, with a poor correlation between clinical severity and the
*Present address and address for correspondence (G.K.B.): Genetics Laboratory, Department
of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK
MS received 16.6.92 Accepted 16.7.92
835

836

Dahl et al.

level of residual enzyme activity in cultured fibroblasts (Robinson 1988). A genetic
basis for some of the heterogeneity became apparent when the gene for the somatic
form of the Etc~ subunit was cloned (Dahl et al 1987; De Meirleir et al 1988; Koike
et al 1988) and mapped to the Xp22.i region of the X chromosome (locus designated
PDHA1) (Brown RM et al 1989). PDH Ela deficiency is an X-linked disease which
occurs in males and females with approximately equal frequency. While hemizygous
males are usually severely affected, often with profound lactic acidosis, heterozygous
females also usually manifest symptoms.
PDH Ele deficiency in heterozygous females is primarily a neurodegenerative
disorder with considerable variation in the degree of systemic lactic acid accumulation.
It appears that the metabolic threshold for development of neurological symptoms
is commonly exceeded in these females, whereas PDH activity in peripheral tissues
is usually sufficient to prevent significant overproduction of lactic acid. As a
consequence, there are very few truly asymptomatic carriers and affected individuals
rarely reach adulthood. In this situation the majority of cases of PDH Ela deficiency
should represent new mutations, and this view is supported by family studies which
demonstrate that the condition is usually sporadic (Robinson et al 1987; Kerr et al
1988).
We now present data on three individuals from two unrelated families with the
same mutation in the PDH EI~ subunit gene. In one family, a severely affected
daughter has the mutation but it is not present in somatic tissues of either parent.
In the second family, three generations have been studied and the mutation is present
in somatic tissues of both mother and daughter but not in the grandmother from
whom the mutant X chromosome was derived. Although they have the same mutation,
these three females differ widely in their clinical, biochemical and pathological
features. Variation in patterns of X chromosome inactivation in different individuals
and between different tissues of the same individual may play a significant role in
generating this heterogeneity.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Two unrelated female patients with pyruvate dehydrogenase EI~ deficiency were
studied, together with several family members in each case. In the first family the
patient (LA29a), her mother (LA29M) and father (LA29F) were investigated, while
in the second family results were obtained for the patient (LA7a), her mother (LA7M)
and her maternal grandmother (LA7mGM).
Details of fibroblast culture, pyruvate dehydrogenase assay and immunochemical
analysis of pyruvate dehydrogenase subunits by Western blotting have all been
published previously (Brown RM et at 1989; Wicking et al 1986).
The mutations in LA7a and LA29a were identified using a protocol described
previously (Dahl et al 1990). Briefly, mRNA was isolated from fibroblasts, cDNA
was prepared from it, and the PDH Ele cDNA was amplified in two sections
(592 and 798 bp, respectively) using the potymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Saiki et al
1988). The mutations were located using the chemical cleavage method for
detection of mismatches (CCM) (Cotton et al 1988; Dahl et al 1989). The DNA
J. lnher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

P D H Deficiency in Females

837

sequences of the regions containing the mismatches were then determined from singlestranded DNA generated by PCR amplification (Gyllenstein and Erlich 1988).
Genomic DNA was isolated from LA7M, LA7mGM, LA29M and LA29F. A segment
of the PDH EI~ gene from the end of intron 9 to the end of exon 10 was amplified
using primers PDH-15i (5'-TCGATTACTACTTTTCCC-3') and PDH-Z2 (5'CTTTAGTTCTTCCACACTGG-3'), and the fragment was sequenced. In all cases
both DNA strands were sequenced from several independent DNA preparations.
The pattern of X-chromosome inactivation in cultured cells and post-mortem
tissues was determined from the methylation state at the hypervariable DXS255
locus, using Southern blot analysis. Genomic DNA was digested with the methylationsensitive and insensitive isoschizomers HpaII and MspI, and the filter was probed
with M27fl (Boyd and Fraser 1990; Brown et al 1990). At the DXS255 locus, the
MspI/HpaII sites are methylated on the active X chromosome (Boyd et al 1988).
Analysis of a polymorphic (CA), repeat in the 3' untranslated region of the
dystrophin gene was performed as described by Beggs and Kunkel (1990).
CASE HISTORIES

Patient LA29a was a female born at term with birth weight of 2620g. Early
development was slow with poor visual contact and she was significantly hypertonic.
By 2 months of age she developed flexor and extensor spasms and spasticity and
an electroencephalogram showed periodic discharges. Growth and development
remained poor and biochemical studies revealed greatly elevated blood lactate and
pyruvate concentrations (14 and 0.27 mmol/L, respectively).
At 5 months of age, a respiratory infection precipitated acute metabolic decompensation and death. At postmortem, major pathological findings in the brain included
marked hydrocephalus with cerebral atrophy, a loss of neurones in the grey matter
and focal areas of gliosis in the underlying white matter.
Patient LA7a, the second female patient, was born at 38 weeks gestation with a
birth weight of 2690 g. During the later stages of the pregnancy there had been poor
weight gain and failing maternal urinary oestriol levels. By day 2 the baby was noted
to be lethargic and hypotonic, and was sucking poorly. She subsequently developed
a mild metabolic acidosis with elevated plasma lactate and pyruvate concentrations
(4.9 and 0.34mmoI/L, respectively).
Subsequently, her development was grossly delayed and she had poor visual
function. She began to have seizures and there were generalized paroxysmal
electroencephalographic abnormalities. By late childhood, she was profoundly
retarded and microcephalic with a spastic tetraparesis, kyphoscoliosis and myoclonic
epilepsy. She died at the age of 17 years.
At postmortem, the brain was small (415g) and the two cerebral hemispheres
differed considerably in size, with both showing microgyria. The laterat ventricles
were grossly dilated and there were ectopic nodules of grey matter in the walls. There
was only a thin vestige of the corpus callosum anteriorly. Severe neuronal loss and
gliosis was present in the cerebral cortex, periaqueductal grey matter, dentate nucleus,
thalamus and left hippocampus. The medullary pyramids were absent and the inferior
olives were divided into small posterior and larger anterior portions.
J. Inher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

838

Dahl et al.

The mother of patient LA7 is designated La7M. She was the offspring of a nonconsanguineous marriage and had four brothers, all of normal intelligence. Her
development was delayed in all aspects. She did not walk until 4 years of age and
could not spell until she was 20, She had epilepsy which was reasonably controlled
with medication.
As an adult, she was able to cope with simple reading and writing and could keep
track of hospital appointments and medications. She cared for her daughter for the
first seven years until the task became physically too demanding. Although never
formally assessed, she would have fallen into the mild-moderate range of mental
retardation. She died at age 46 with disseminated carcinoma of the colon. A cerebral
computerized tomography scan was performed during her terminal illness and no
brain abnormalities were observed. No autopsy material was obtained.
RESULTS
Characterization of the mutations: When PCR-amplified PDH Elct cDNA fragments
from patients LA29a and LA7a were annealed t o the corresponding fragments
amplified from the normal control plasmid pPDHlc (Dahl et al 1987), subjected to
the CCM reaction and analysed on denaturing urea: acrylamide gels, only one
mismatch was detected and this was the same in both cases. The mismatch was
revealed with the hydroxylamine reaction and was located in the 3' half of the coding
region. DNA sequence analysis showed the change to be a C-to-T substitution of
nucleotide 1009 (Figure 1) which changes Arg 3°2 to Cys (R302C). No other changes
were detected by DNA sequencing of the EI~ coding region. Direct sequencing of
PCR amplified genomic fragments demonstrated that the mutation was not present
in somatic cells of LA29M (Figure 1) and LA29F (results not shown). LA7a and
LA7M were confirmed as heterozygous for the same mutation, but it was absent in
the maternal grandmother, LA7mGM (results not shown).
Pyruvate dehydrogenase activity in cultured fibroblasts and post-mortem tissues: In
patient LA29a, fibroblast pyruvate dehydrogenase activity was 0.4 nmol/min per mg
protein, compared with a range in normal control cells of 0.7-1.0. In patient LA7a
it was 0.48nmol/min per mg protein. Immunoblot analysis with a polyclonal
antiserum to the complete complex revealed normal levels of immunoreactive protein
for all the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex subunits in both patients (Figure 2).
The mild-moderate mental retardation apparent in LA7M had raised the possibility
that she might have a variant of her daughter's condition long before direct
demonstration of the mutation was possible. Pyruvat~ dehydrogenase activity was
measured on fibroblasts grown from three separate skin biopsies and all gave results
within the normal range (0.72, 0.71 and 0.84 nmol/min per mg protein). Immunoblot
assays revealed normal levels of all pyruvate dehydrogenase subunits (Figure 2). No
diagnosis could be established by these methods.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase activity was also measured in post-mortem tissues of the
younger patient, LA29a. The activity in brain and kidney was 20% and 25% of a
normal age-matched control. Activity in liver was extremely low ( < t 0 % of the
J. Inher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

PDH Deficiency in Females

839

LA-29M LA-29a
TCGATCGA

Figure 1 DNA sequence analysis of patient LA29a and her mother. Part of the PDH Elc~
gene including exon 10 was PCR-amplified using primers PDH-15i and PDH-Z2, and the
amplified fragment was sequenced directly as described in Materials and Methods. The four
sequencing tracks from the two females are shown and the mutation in LA29a is indicated
by an arrow. The patient is heterozygous for the mutation, her mother is homozygous for the
normal sequence.
control), however, post-mortem degeneration of this tissue sample was considered
likely.

X-inactivation analysis: Analysis of the DXS255 locus after digestion of genomic
DNA with MspI demonstrated bands of 10.4 and 9.2 kb in patient LA29a and bands
of 9.2 and 8.0 kb in her mother, indicating maternal transmission of the 9.2 kb band
to the daughter (Figure 3A). From the relative intensities of the bands in the HpaII
track, it was determined that the paternally derived X chromosome was active in
approximately 60% of cells in the fibroblast culture from this patient (Figure 3A,
track 1H). Similar analysis of a range of post-mortem tissues revealed a wide variation
in the pattern of X-inactivation (Figure 4), as found previously in other patients
Y. lnher. Me~ab. Dis, 15 (1992)

840

D a h l et al.
--

E2

I0

• =

!

i

i

o

<~
.J

<¢
.J

<¢
.J

.~

El ~ - - - ~

Figure 2 PDH immunoblot analysis of LA7a, LA7M and LA29a. Extracts of fibroblast
mitochondria were fractionated on SDS/polyacrylamide gels, blotted and probed with an
antibody to the total PDH complex as described in Materials and Methods. The PDH Elc~
and E2 bands are indicated. This antibody reacts only weakly with the Elfl and E3 components
of the complex, but amounts of these are also normal in both patients.
(Brown et al 1990). The proportion of cells in which the paternal X chromosome was
active was approximately 20% in brain, 15% in kidney and 50% in liver. These
proportions correlate well with the levels of residual P D H enzyme activity in these
tissues (except for the liver). The maternal X chromosome, represented by the 9.2 kb
band, is active in the majority of cells in the brain and kidney samples, and in order
to account for the low P D H activity in these tissues, this chromosome must carry
the P D H E l e mutation.
The fragments generated by MspI digestion of the DXS255 locus on the two X
chromosomes in patient LA7a were 10.0 and 8.8 kb, while in the mother, bands of
11.0 and 8.8 kb were demonstrated (Figure 3A). Since both LA7a and her mother
have the mutation it must have been transmitted from the mother to the daughter
on the X chromosome which generates the 8.8kb band. However, comparison of
fibroblast P D H activity and X-inactivation pattern in the mother suggest that in her
cells the mutation is on the X chromosome which generates the 11.0 kb band. This
is because the chromosome which produces the 8.8 kb band is active in the great
majority of fibroblasts (Figure 3B) and the pyruvate dehydrogenase activity is normal.

J. Inher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

M

H M

i~

D

I I

II

~'

H M

:>

~

II

4

,

~ i

H M

~
~

3

H

I

--11
--10
--8.8

(B)

1i

3.8

10

~i~ii~!~

M H M H

.... O " " ~ " "

!

2
II.........

~

11

4

=

M H

~""~

3

M H

It

~igure 3 X chromosome segregation and inactivation patterns in cultured fibroblasts. (A) Genomic D N A from cultured
ibroblasts of patients LA29a (lane 1) and LA7a (lane 3 ) a n d their respective mothers (lanes 2 and 4, respectively) were
~nalysed with the M27/¢ probe as described in Materials and Methods. D N A was digested with BamHl and either MspI
M) or HpalI (H). In the mother of LA29a (lane 2), the X chromosomes generate fragments of 9.2 and 8.0 kb and the X
hromosome forming the 9.2kb fragment has been passed to the daughter. The two X chromosomes in LA7M generate
ragments of 11 and 8.8 kb (lane 4). Patient LA7a has inherited the X chromosome generating the 8.8 kb fragment from her
taother and an X chromosome generating a 10kb fragment from her father. (B) A similar analysis of genomic D N A from
:ultured fibroblasts of patient LA7a (lane 1) and from three different fibroblast cultures from her mother, LA7M (lanes 2-~), These cultures were derived from three skin biopsies from widely separate locations.

A)

~

9.2--

8--

~

0.4-

,~b

1

~b

1

842

Dahl et al.

1
I

2
I

I

3
I

I

4
I

I

kb

10.4-o

,

9.2 - o

MH

MH

M H M H

Figure 4 X-inactivation pattern in different tissues from patient LA29a. DNA from cultured
fibroblasts (lane 2) and post-mortem samples of brain (lane 1), kidney (lane 3) and liver (lane
4) were digested with BamHI and either MspI (M) or HpaII (H) and analysed with the M27fi
probe as in the legend to Figure 3. The proportion of cells in which the mutant X chromosome
(which generates the 9.2 kb fragment) is active ranges from 85% in kidney to 40% in fibroblasts.
These results suggested that there had been a recombination between the P D H A I
and DXS255 loci during meiosis in the oocyte which gave rise to the daughter. There
is a considerable genetic distance between the two loci on the short arm of the X
chromosome and recombination between them should occur quite frequently (Drayna
and White 1985). This hypothesis was tested directly by analysis of an informative
polymorphic (CA), repeat in the 3' untranslated region of the dystrophin gene which
lies between the P D H EI~ locus and DXS255 (Figure 5). In LA7M the relevant X
chromosome has the haplotype '8.8, a'. However, in the daughter, the maternally
derived chromosome must be of haptotype '8.8, A', indicating a recombination in the
region between M27/~ (Xp11.22) and dystrophin (Xp21.3). In LA7mGM the M27/~
probe detects 11.0 kb and 9.3 kb fragments, indicating that the X chromosome bearing
the mutant PDHA1 gene (represented by the 11.0kb band in LA7M), was derived
from the grandmother.
J. lnher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

PDH Deficiency in Females

9.3
A 11
A ?

843

LA-7mGM

8.8
a 11
A (~
y

[~8.8a

LA-7M

['---1 10
L=[.J
A

;LA-7a

8.8A10A

Figure 5 Linkage analysis demonstrating recombination between PDHA1 and DXS255 in
patient LA7a. The numbers refer to the allele sizes detected by probe M27/~ at the DXS255
locus. The letters 'A' and 'a' refer to the alleles detected by PCR analysis of a polymorphic
(CA), repeat in the 3' end of the dystrophin gene. Allele 'a' is 4 bp shorter than 'A'.
DISCUSSION
Two unrelated females with neurological dysfunction, structural brain abnormalities
and a variable degree of lactic acidosis have the same mutation in the X-linked P D H
E l e subunit gene. The mutation, a C-to-T substitution, results in the replacement of
arginine by cysteine at position 302 (designated R302C). In one patient, DNA
sequence, X-chromosome inactivation and biochemical studies indicate a new
mutation. The parents are clinically and biochemicatly normal and do not carry the
mutation in their somatic cells. In the second case, the same mutation was present
in somatic cells of the mother, although she had minimal neurological symptoms and
no demonstrable systemic biochemical abnormality. In this family, the chromosome
carrying the P D H E l e mutation was derived from the maternal grandmother who
must have been the source of the mutation although it was not present in her somatic
cells. The clinically mild and static presentation of P D H E l e deficiency in the mother
highlights our limited understanding of the full clinical spectrum of this condition.
It is first necessary to consider the possibility that finding the same base change
in two unrelated females could indicate that it is a neutral polymorphism unrelated
to the enzyme deficiency. Strong evidence against this is the absence of the substitution
in both parents of LA29a and its presence in the retarded mother of LA7a, but not
in the normal grandmother (LATmGM). Further, no other coding sequence differences
were detected in these three individuals using the CCM method and DNA sequence
analysis, nor have we detected this substitution in any other normal or PDH-deficient
individuals whom we have analysed. The amino acid substitution (which change an
amino acid charge) is likely to alter protein folding and the location of the substitution

J. lnher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

844

D a h l et al.

is in the same region (amino acids 300 to 315) as mutations we have characterized
in five other females with PDH Elc~ deficiency (Daht et al 1990, 1992; Hansen et al
1991). The mutation is in a CpG dinucleotide, a sequence recognized as constituting
a mutational hot spot (Youssoufian et al 1986; Cooper and Youssoufian 1988;
Koeberl et al 1989). Although this does not have a direct bearing on whether or not
the mutation is causative, it is relevant to the independent occurrence of the same
mutation in two different families. It is of interest that this has already been observed,
when only about 20 E l e mutations have been defined (Dahl et al 1992).
The mutation in these patients results in the synthesis of a functionally impaired
PDH Ele subunit, since the levels of immunoreactive protein are normal. This
eliminates the possibility of directly correlating the level of E l e gene expression (as
measured by the amount of immunoreactive protein) with the pattern of Xchromosome inactivation, as can be done with patients whose mutations abolish E l e
subunit synthesis or assembly (Brown et al 1990). However, the X-inactivation pattern
can be determined independently by analysing the methylation status at any
polymorphic X-linked locus which is differentially methylated on active and inactive
X chromosomes. In previous studies we have demonstrated a close correlation
between PDH E l e gene expression and the X-inactivation pattern determined in this
way using the DXS255 locus.
The correlation between PDH activity and X-inactivation in cultured fibroblasts
or tissues from affected family members also provides a reliable method for identifying
the origin of mutant X chromosomes as long as the inactivation pattern is significantly
skewed away from 50:50. This requirement is usually not limiting as the patients
are only ascertained because of significant enzyme deficiency and this reflects bias
towards expression of the mutant chromosome. In the family of patient LA29a, the
results indicate that the mutant X chromosome originated in the mother. Comparable
studies in patient LA7a and her mother led to the prediction that there must have
been a recombination event between the PDHA1 and DXS255 loci in the meiosis
which led to the patient. This was independently confirmed by linkage analysis using
an informative polymorphic (CA), repeat in the dystrophin gene locus which maps
between DXS255 and PDHA1 on the short arm of the X chromosome. The fact that
this recombination event was predicted on the basis of the M27/~ results further
supports the reliability of assessment of X-chromosome inactivation from the
methylation pattern at the DXS255 locus in cultured fibroblasts.
The most striking feature of these three females is the highly variable clinical
presentation of the same underlying mutation. The difference is most extreme in the
case of the mother and daughter, but even the two patients differed in that one had
only mildly elevated blood lactate while the other had severe and persistent lactic
acidosis. While differences in the overall genetic background will contribute to this
variation, this and previous studies suggest that variations in patterns of Xchromosome inactivation are likely to be a significant determinant (Brown G K et al
1989; Dahl et al 1990; Brown et al 1990). In all of the female patients with PDH Elc~
deficiency we have studied so far, all tissues examined show a mosaic PDH activity
pattern, indicating that there is no consistent selection for or against cells expressing
the mutant gene.
J. Inher. Metab. Dis.

15 (1992)

P D H Deficiency in Females

845

Manifestation of PDH E lc~ deficiency in heterozygous females will reflect these
variations. Systemic lactic acidosis will be determined, in large part, by the degree of
PDH deficiency in peripheral tissues. The threshold for this will be set by the
proportion of cells expressing the normal gene in different organs. Similarly,
neurological manifestations and cerebral pathology will reflect variations in the
distribution and level of PDH deficiency in cells of the brain. However, in this case,
reduced energy generation may be more important than lactate production because
of the unique role of PDH in normal cerebral energy metabolism. In principle, one
should expect a continuous spectrum of manifestation in heterozygous females from
severe neonatal lactic acidosis to truly asymptomatic carriers.
Available evidence suggests that most heterozygous females with PDH Ele
mutations do, in fact, manifest some evidence of the condition. Although it is possible
that there may be many more individuals like LA7M, they are unlikely to be
ascertained at present, except as mothers of more severely affected children. PDH
EI~ gene analysis is too complex to apply to the large number of females with nonspecific mild to moderate mental regardation who could be possible candidates for
PDH deficiency. However, the possibility of such minimally affected patients should
be borne in mind as the genetic implications are highly significant.
The present study also highlights another significant practical problem in diagnosis
of females with PDH Elc~ deficiency based on measurements of gene expression.
Although the presence of mild neurological abnormalities in the mother of LA7a
resulted in extensive biochemical investigation, her true genetic status was only
recognized once the mutation had been identified in her daughter. Subsequent Xinactivation studies of fibroblast cultures from several different skin biopsies revealed
that the normal X chromosome was being expressed in over 90% of cells and any
contribution from the small population of cells expressing the mutation was lost in
the normal variation of enzyme assay.
Thus, if normal results are obtained in biochemical studies, a diagnosis of PDH
EI~ deficiency in females can only be excluded if a direct analysis of the pattern of
X-inactivation demonstrates that both X chromosomes are active in a significant
proportion of the cells in the sample. In the same way, any diagnostic strategy based
on the analysis of an expressed gene (as cDNA, for example) will miss the diagnosis
in samples in which most cells are expressing the normal X chromosome.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Drs J. Ray and M. W. Partington for blood samples, and E. Tsotsis and
W. M. Hutchison for assistance. L. L. H. was on leave from the Department of
Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark. This work was partly supported by
a Centre Block Grant from the National Health & Medical Research Council of
Australia.
REFERENCES

Beggs AH, Kunkel LM (1990) A polymorphic CACA repeat in the 3' untranslated region of
dystrophin. NucI Acids Res 18: 1931.
Y. lnher. Metab. Dis. t5 (1992)

846

Dahl et al.

Boyd Y, Fraser N J, Craig IW (1988) Specifc methylation at the hypervariable DXS255 locus
on active X chromosomes: a simple system for the assessment of X inactivation status. J
Med Genet 25: 645.
Boyd Y, Fraser NJ (1990) Methylation patterns at the hypervariable X-chromosome locus
DXS255 (M27fl): Correlation with inactivation status. Genomics 7: 182-187.
Brown GK, Scholem RD, Hunt SM, Harrison JR, Pollard AC (1987) Hyperammonaemia and
lactic acidosis in a patient with pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency. J Inher Metab Dis 10:
359-366.
Brown GK, Haan EA, Kirby DM et al (1988) "Cerebral' lactic acidosis: defects in pyruvate
metabolism with profound brain damage and minimal systemic acidosis. Eur J Pediatr 147:
10-14.
Brown GK, Brown RM, Scholem RD, Kirby DM, Dahl H-HM (1989) The clinical and
biochemical spectrum of human pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency. Ann New York Acad
Sci 573: 360-368.
Brown RM, Dahl H-HM, Brown GK (1989) X-Chromosome location of the functional gene
for the Ele subunit of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Genomics 4: 174-181.
Brown RM, Fraser NJ, Brown GK (1990). Differential methylation of the hypervariable locus
DXS255 on active and inactive X chromosomes correlates with expression of a human Xlinked gene. Genomics 7: 215-221.
Chow CW, Anderson RMcD, Kenny GCT (1987) Neuropathology in "cerebral' lactic acidosis.
Acta Neuropathol (Berlin) 74: 393-396.
Cooper DN, Youssoufian H (1988) The CpG dinucleotide and human genetic disease. Hum
Genet 78: 151-155.
Cotton RGH, Rodrigues NR, Campbell RD (1988) Reactivity of cytosine and thymine in
single-base-pair mismatches with hydroxylamine and osmium tetroxide and its application
to the study of mutations. Proc NatI Acad Sci USA 85:4397 4401.
Dahl H-HM, Hunt SM, Hutchison WM, Brown GK (1987) The human pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex: Isolation of cDNA clones for the EI~ subunit, sequence analysis, and characterization of the mRNA. J Biol Chem 262: 7398-7403.
Dahl H-HM, Lamande SL, Cotton RGH, Bateman JF (1989). Detection and localization of
base changes in RNA using a chemical cleavage method. Anal Biochem 183: 263-268.
Dahl H-HM, Maragos C, Brown RM, Hansen L, Brown GK (1990) Pyruvate dehydrogenase
deficiency caused by deletion of a 7 base pair repeat sequence in the Elc~ gene. Am J Hum
Genet 47: 286-293.
Dahl H-HM, Brown GK, Brown RM et al (1992) Mutations and polymorphisms in the
pyruvate dehydrogenase Elc~ gene. Hum Mutation 1:97 102.
De Meirleir L, MacKay N, Lain Hon Wah AM, Robinson BH (1988) Isolation of a full-length
complementary DNA coding for human Elct subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex. J Biol Chem 263: 1991-1995.
Drayna D, White R (1985) The genetic linkage map of the human X chromosome. Science
230: 753-758.
Gyllensten UB, Erlich HA (1988). Generation of single-stranded DNA by the polymerase
chain reaction and its application to direct sequencing of the HLA-DQA locus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 85: 7652-7656.
Hansen LL, Brown GK, Kirby DM, Dahl H-HM (t991) Characterization of the mutations
in three patients with pyruvate dehydrogenase Ela deficiency. J Inher Metab Dis 14: 140151.
Ho E, Wexler ID, Kerr DS, Patel MS (1989) Genetic defects in human pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Ann New York Acad Sci 573: 347-359.
Kerr DS, Berry SA, Lusk MM, Ho L, Patel MS (1988) A deficiency of both subunits of
pyruvate dehydrogenase which is not expressed in fibroblasts. Pediatr Res 24: 95-100.
Koeberl DD, Bottema CD~ Buerstedde JM, Sommer SS (1989) Functionally important regions
of the factor IX gene have a tow rate of polymorphism and a high rate of mutation in the
dinucleotide CpG. Am J Hum Genet 45: 448--457.

J. lnher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

847

PDH Deficiency in Females

Koike K, Ohta S, Urata Y, Kagawa Y, Koike M (1988) Cloning and sequencing of cDNAs
encoding c~and/~ subunits of human pyruvate dehydrogenase. Proc NatI Acad Sci USA 85:
41-45.
Robinson BH (1988) Cell culture studies on patients with mitochondrial diseases: molecular
defects in pyruvate dehydrogenase. J Bioenerg Biomembr 20: 313-323.
Robinson BH, MacMillan H, Petrova-Benedict R, Sherwood WG (1987) Variable clinical
presentation in patients with defective Et component of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
J Pediatr 111: 525-533.
Robinson BH. Chun K, Mackay N, Otulakowski G, Petrova-Benedict R, Witlard H (1989)
Isolated and combined deficiencies of the ~-keto acid dehydrogenase complexes. Ann New
York Acad Sci 573: 337-346.
Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S et al (t988) Primer-directed enzymatic amplification of DNA
with a thermostable DNA polymerase. Science 239: 487-491.
Wexler ID, Kerr DS, Ho L e t al (1988) Heterogeneous expression of protein and mRNA in
pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85: 7336-7340.
Wicking CA, Scholem RD, Hunt SM, Brown GK (1986) Immunochemical analysis of normal
and mutant forms of human pyruvate dehydrogenase. Biochem J 239: 89-96.
Youssoufian H, Kazazian H J, Phillips DG et al (1986) Recurrent mutations in haemophilia
A give evidence for CpG mutation hotspots. Nature 324: 380-382.

SOCIETY FOR THE STUDY OF
INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
The SSIEM was founded in 1963 by a small group in the North of England but
now has more than 70% of its members outside the UK. The aim of the Society
is to promote the exchange of ideas between professional workers in different
disciplines who are interested in inherited metabolic disorders. This aim is pursued
in scientific meetings and publications.
The Society holds an annual symposium concentrating on different topics each
year with facilities for poster presentations. There is always a clinical aspect as well
as a laboratory component. The meeting is organized so that there is ample time
for informal discussion; this feature has allowed the formation of a network of
contacts throughout the world. The international and multidisciplinary approach
is also reflected in the Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease.
If you are interested in joining the SSIEM then contact the Treasurer: Dr. D.
Isherwood, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Liverpool Children's
Hospital, Alder Hey, Liverpool, L12 2AP, UK. The current subscription is £30 per
year payable January 1st each year. This subscription includes the 6 issues of the
Journal o f Inherited Metabolic Disease as well as the regular circulation of a
newsletter.

J. Inher. Metab. Dis. 15 (1992)

