Original Articles

Direct mutational analysis in a family with hereditary
non-polyposis colorectal cancer
N. S . Van de Water

S. M. Stewart

Scientific Officer, Department of Haernatology, Auckland Hospital
and Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Auckland
School of Medicine, Auckland, New Zealand.

Registry Coordinator, Department of Pathology, University of
Auckland School of Medicine, Auckland, New Zealand.

P. Jeevaratnam

M. R. Lane

Technician, Department of Pathology, University of Auckland School
of Medicine, Auckland, New Zealand.

Gastroenterologist, Department of Medicine, Auckland Hospital,
Auckland, New Zealand.

P. J. Browett

J. R. Jass

Senior Lecturer in Haematology, Department of Molecular Medicine,
University of Auckland School of Medicine and Department of
Haematology, Auckland Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.

Professor of Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Auckland School of Medicine, Auckland, New Zealand.

Abstract
Background: It is now known that a proportion of cases of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal
cancer (HNPCC) is caused by mutations in the human homologue of the yeast DNA mismatch
repair gene MSH2. A proline to leucine change due to a C to T transition in codon 622 oflzMSH2
has been identified in a large HNPCC family of over 240 individuals.
Aim: To develop an assay to detect the family-specific mutation and apply the findings to genetic
screening.
Methods: The C to T change in codon 622 creates a new Mae I site (CTAG) allowing a simple,
non-radioactive assay to be developed in order to detect this mutation. The assay was applied to
affected members of the family and their first degree relatives (siblings and offspring) between
the ages of 17 and 77 years, a total of 75 subjects within two generations (IV and V).
Results: 13/13 (100%) subjects with cancer were mutation positive, 7/7 (100%) elderly subjects
from generation IV and with no evidence ofcancer were mutation negative, 23/57 (40%) subjects
from generation V were mutation positive and 0 6 0 (100%) unrelated subjects were mutation
negative. Following the demonstration of perfect segregation of the disease with the mutation,
family members were invited to receive the results of the test. Sixty-three (84%) responded within
six weeks of receiving the invitation. Genetic screening and counselling members of HNPCC
families was perceived as beneficial overall, allowing non-carriers of the mutant gene (as well as
their descendants) to be removed from a programme of colonoscopic surveillance. (Aust NZ J
Med 1994; 24: 682-686.)
Key words: Cancer, colon, rectum, hereditary, mutation.

INTRODUCTION
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)
accounts for around 5% of cases of colorectal cancer and

is characterised by autosomal dominant inheritance,
with high penetrance and an early age of onset. Bowel
cancers are more likely to occur in the proximal colon

Reprint requests CO: Professor J. R. Jass, Department of Pathology, University of Auckland, School of Medicine, Private Bag 92019, Auckland,
New Zealand.
This work is supported by the Health Research Council and Cancer Society of New Zealand.

682

Aust N Z J Med 1994; 24

VAN DE WATER E T AL.

and to be multiple. Extracolonic cancers, particularly
of endometrium, occur with increased frequency.l
Colorectal cancers originate within benign neoplastic
polyps termed adenomas; the progression of these to
cancer is accompanied by increasing size, epithelial
dysplasia and villosity.2
Linkage analysis in two HNPCC families revealed
close linkage of the disease to the anonymous marker
D2S123 which maps to the region of 2~15-16.3Two
groups have subsequently identified germline mutations in a gene within this region called hMSH2.4,5The
hMSH2 gene is a human homologue of the bacterial
MutS and yeast MSH genes which play a central role
in DNA mismatch repair. In E. coli the three gene
products of MutS, MutL, and MutH are involved in
the initial steps of mismatch repair and act in a coordinated fashion to bind and excise any newly
replicated DNA which may have mismatch errors. The
role ofMutS in this process is to bind to the mismatch
and form a complex with MutL and MutH. Eukaryote
cells are thought to carry out essentially the same
process with homologues of the bacterial system.6
A human homologue of the bacterial MutL gene,
hMLHf, has also been identified. This gene resides
on chromosome 3p21,'r8 a region previously linked to
cancer susceptibility in some HNPCC kindreds.' Inactivation of mismatch repair genes leads to the
accumulation of numerous replication errors in DNA,
particularly within microsatellite regions of the
genome.'O Such replication errors have been
documented in colon and endometrial cancers from
HNPCC families." Germline mutations within either
the hMSHZ or hMLHl genes are believed to be responsible for most cases of HNPCC.' Recently, however,
two additional genes hPMSl and hPMS,?(on chromosomes 2 and 7 respectively) have been implicated in
HNPCC."
DNA from several affected members of a New
Zealand HNPCC family (J) was found to contain a
germline mutation in one hMSH2 allele.4 The C to
T transition in codon 622 results in a proline to leucine
substitution in a highly conserved position in all known
MutS-related genes from both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes.' We describe here a simple non-radioactive
test for the codon 622 C to T transition, which creates
a new Mae I restriction enzyme site. Its use in the
screening of at-risk members of family J is described.

METHODS
The subjects involved in this study were derived from
two sources: 50 unrelated randomly selected healthy
volunteers were used as a normal control group and
75 individuals were selected as the test group from an
HNPCC family of over 240 members in which the
underlying mutation was characterised previously as
a C to T transition at codon 622.' The selected
HEREDITARY COLORECTAL CANCER

individuals represented all living family members who
had either histologically confirmed colorectal and/or
endometrial or ovarian cancer (13) or were siblings or
direct descendants of those diagnosed with colorectal
andlor endometrial or ovarian cancer (62). The subjects
were members of generation IV or succeeding generation V of the family.
Generation IV included 11 members with colorectal
andlor endometrial (ten) or ovarian (one) cancer and
seven subjects with no cancer. There were nine affected
but deceased members of generation IV and one noncompliant subject from whom DNA samples were not
available. Generation V included two individuals with
colorectal cancer and 55 at-risk subjects without cancer.
DNA was not obtained from one member of generation
V who had died of colorectal cancer. The age range
of subjects in generation V was 17-49 years (mean 31).
All but seven at-risk subjects in generations IV and
V have been colonoscoped on at least one occasion.
Written informed consent was obtained in accordance
with the requirements of the North Health Ethics
Committee.
Genomic DNA from each individual was prepared
from 10 mL peripheral blood samples using standard
proteinase Klphenol extraction. DNA was amplified
by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the
primers 5 'CCTGTTCCATATGTACGA-3 ' and
5 'CAAAGTATACGTCATTAGGA-3 ', resulting in
a 127 bp fragment containing hMSH2 codons 616 to
657. 200 ng of DNA was amplified in 50 pL reaction
volumes, using PCR conditions consisting of 30 cycles
at 94°C for one minute, 55°C for one minute, and
72 "C for one minute in the buffer supplied with the
Taq polymerase (Boehringer Mannheim). The PCR
product was subjected to Mae I digestion according
to the supplier's recommendations (Boehringer Mannheim) and analysed by electrophoresis on 2% agarose
gels stained with ethidium bromide. Direct sequencing
of PCR products was performed using the fmol
sequencing system (Promega) and [A33P] ATP end
labelled primers.
The 75 family members were contacted by letter and
advised that the results of the mutational analysis were
available. It was made clear that they had the right to
know and also the right not to know the findings. It
was also explained that if they chose to be informed
of the findings, we would be advising that colonoscopic
screening could be discontinued for those with a negative result. By six weeks 63 (84%) subjects had
returned consent forms, 60 indicating their desire to
be told the findings and three declining the offer.
Those wishing to be informed were invited by telephone to attend an interview at which the findings and
counselling were provided. For those with a positive
result the importance of continued colonoscopic
screening was stressed. It was also emphasised that
683
Aust NZ J Med 1994; 24

Those with a negative result were told that their risk
of developing colorectal cancer was not 070, but the
same as that for the general population.

Figure I: Mae I analysis of hMSH2 mutation in a subset of
HNPCC family J. Lane M is a 100 bp ladder. The upper
band for each subject is at 127 bp and the lower band is
108 bp. Filled in symbols represent patients with histologically confirmed colorectal cancer. Clear and stippled
symbols are cancer free subjects.

their children would be at 50% risk of inheriting the
altered gene and would require DNA testing to be
followed by colonoscopy if the test were positive.

RESULTS
The presence or absence of a Mae I restriction
endonuclease recognition site (CTAG) created by the
mutation at codon 622 was exploited as a means of
identifying individuals in this family who carry the
germline hMSH2 mutation. Using the primers
described, PCR amplification of the region of the
hMSH2 gene covering codons 616 to 657 produced
a predicted PCR product of 127 bp. The product
amplified from the mutant sequence contained a novel
Mae I site, resulting in fragments of 108 bp and 19 bp
following digestion, whereas the product containing
the wild-type sequence was unchanged (Figure 1). This
was confirmed by direct sequencing of the PCR
product in two subjects (data not shown).
DNA samples from a control group of 50 individuals
unrelated to family J were tested and all generated a
single band of 127 bp following Mae I digestion of the
PCR product. Seventy-five members of family J were
tested and the results are demonstrated according to
generation and phenotype (Table 1). In generation IV
there was perfect segregation between phenotype and
test result. All subjects with histologically confirmed
colorectal (eight) or endometrial/ovarian (three) cancer
generated bands of 127, 108 and 19 bp, indicative of
a germline mutation at codon 622 (C to T transition).
Subjects with no mutation have developed neither
colorectal cancer nor adenoma. A mixed hyperplastic
polyp/adenoma was removed from a male subject aged
65 with no mutation. Small unclassified polyps were
removed from one mutation negative male. Generation
V equates to an at-risk group in which, as expected,
the codon 622 mutation was present in approximately
50% of those tested (40.3%). Four subjects carrying
the mutation have developed colorectal neoplasms: a

TABLE 1
Distribution of Lesions According to Generation and Presence or Absence of Mutation

Generation I V *
gene mutation
no gene mutation

CRC

Other CA

Polyp

AD

HP

Mixed polyp

Neg

No endosc

8
0

3

0
1

0
0

0
0

0
1

0
3

0

11

2

7
-

0

Total

18

Generation V t
gene mutation
no gene mutation

2
0

0
0

1
0

2

0

1
4

0

0

16
26

1

23

4

34
c7

JI

Overall total

75

*Age range = 54-77; mean age = 63
?Age range = 17-49, mean age = 31
Abbrevialions: CRC = colorectal cancer (does not exclude presence of other cancers or polyps); Other CA = endometrial or ovarian cancer; Polyp = polyp(s)
at colonoscopy, but not submitted for histology; AD = adenoma(s) (no CRC);HP = hyperplastic polyp(s) (no AD or CRC): Mixed polyp = mixed hyperplastic
polypiadenoma; Neg = negative for polyps or cancer of colorecium or cancer in extracolonic sites associated with HNPCC; No endosc= patient refused
endoscopy (6) or too young (1). otherwise alive and well.

684

Aust NZ J Med 1994; 24

VAN DE WATER E T AL.

cancer in a male aged 19, a cancer in a female aged
36, three metachronous tubular or tubulovillous
adenomas of the rectum in a female at ages 22,26 and
27 and a tubular adenoma in a female aged 30 years.
In a fifth (male) subject ‘polyps’ were diathermied
without histological verification of their nature at 36,
37 and 40 years.

DISCUSSION
In this study the predictable generation of a new
restriction enzyme site was successfully exploited to
allow distinction between wild-type and mutant
hMSH2 alleles. Not only was there perfect segregation of the DNA mutational assay with the HNPCC
phenotype, but the results were consistent with linkage
analysis undertaken for most members of the same
~edigree.~
The benefit of presymptomatic genetic testing for
HNPCC was made clear in this study of one large
family. Those not carrying the gene were immediately
removed from a group at high risk of developing
colorectal cancer and requiring regular colonoscopic
screening. Concerns at the possibility of passing the
mutation on to their children were assuaged also.
Those shown to carry the gene remained in a high risk
group and so their position was not radically altered.
It is reasonable to suggest that the net result of gene
testing was a beneficial one. However, it is important
to monitor the medium and long term effects of genetic
testing. The psychological impact of learning that a
50% risk of gene carriage has become 100% may not
be negligible.
Because of the large size of the family and the
demonstration of perfect disease segregation, there can
be no doubt that codon 622 mutation in hMSH2 underlies the hereditary disposition to colorectal cancer in
this family. Furthermore, a test tailored to exploit the
presence of the mutation would reliably identify gene
carriers within the at-risk group. It has been shown
that mutations may occur at other sites in the hMSH2
gene.4,5 In addition other genes, such as hMLH1,
hPMSl and hPMS2 are implicated in HNPCC.7.8.12
The test described in this study would apply only to
families with a C to T mutation in codon 622 of
hMSH2. It remains to be shown whether this is a mutational ‘hotspot’ that could be utilised in a significant
proportion of HNPCC families. It is more likely that
only the general principle of the approach adopted
herein could be applied elsewhere. Nevertheless, the
construction of extended pedigrees through the classic
genealogical approach provides a graphic demonstration of the value of family-specific mutation analysis.
The development of a test in which the presence of
a specific mutation could be confidently related to
HNPCC was facilitated by the large number of living
subjects with a cancer from a single HNPCC family.
HEREDITARYCOLORECTAL CANCER

Nevertheless, the decision to provide the results and
advise on the need for hrther colonoscopic surveillance
was not taken lightly. The results and their implications were discussed carefully with each individual in
sessions lasting half an hour. Questionnaires were then
provided to promote feedback and allow the effects of
counselling to be monitored.
Observations over many generations have shown the
hMSH2 gene mutation in this family to be highly
penetrant. It will be important to observe carefully the
natural history of the disease in gene carriers and
monitor the utility of three yearly colonoscopy in relation to cancer prevention. At this time, only four of
23 gene positive subjects in generation V have developed colorectal neoplasms (Table l), although a fifth
had ‘polyps’ diathermied. Hyperplastic polyps have
been identified in both gene positive and gene negative individuals and are unlikely to be markers of the
HNPCC gene. It is therefore important to submit all
polyps detected endoscopically for histological examination. One mixed ‘hyperplastic polypladenoma’ was
found in a gene negative male aged 65 from generation
IV (presumably an incidental lesion).
Despite the fact that the affected family members
share an identical hMSH2 mutation, the age at onset,
number and location of both adenomas and carcinomas
shows considerable variation from person to person.
It is clear, however, that adenomas do not occur in
large numbers, an observation that accords with the
view that genes causing HNPCC serve to accelerate
the progression of adenoma to carcinoma but do not
initiate adenoma de~elopment.’,~For this reason,
mutation positive subjects were told to expect and not
to be falsely reassured by a series of negative colonoscopic examinations in the coming years. The initiation
of adenoma development is presumably influenced
quite independently by other factors and this would
in turn underpin the phenotypic variability of the
disorder. These additional factors are likely to be both
hereditary13 and environmental. This is a potentially
important point, introducing the possibility of
adenoma (hence carcinoma)prevention through dietary
andlor chemical intervention. Currently, DNA testing
would not be undertaken until the time of commencement of colonoscopy (20 years). However, this might
change if intervention therapy in childhood were
shown to be beneficial. One individual expressed at
the time of counselling a strong preference for her
children to be tested immediately. We examined the
issue from several standpoints and concluded that
delaying the decision for some months would be
advisable.
In summary, this is the first report of DNA screening
in an HNPCC family. The test allowed reliable resolution of at-risk subjects into those with and without
a codon 622 mutation in hMSH2. The results were
Ausr NZ J Med 1994; 24
685

imparted to family members through a carefully
monitored approach that will need to be kept under
review.
Date of submission: 23 August 1994

References
1. Lynch HT, Smyrk TC, Watson P et al. Genetics, natural history,
tumor spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer: an updated review. Gastroenterology 1993;
104: 1535-49.
2. Jass JR, Stewart SM, Stewart J, Lane MR. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: morphologies, genes and mutations.
Mutat Res 1994; 290: 125-32.
3. Peltomaki P, Aaltonen LA, Sistonen P er al. Genetic mapping
of a locus predisposing to human colorectal cancer. Science 1993;
260: 810-2.
4. Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N et al. Mutations
of a murS homolog in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
Cell 1993; 75: 1215-25.
5. Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MRS et al. The human mutator
gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. Cell 1993; 75: 1027-38.

6. Friedberg EC (Ed.). The enzymology of DNA repair. Mutat
Res 1990; 236: 145-314.
7. Bronner CE, Baker SM, Morrison PT et al. Mutation in the
DNA mismatch repair gene homologue hMLHI is associated
with hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer. Nature 1994; 368:
258-61.
8. Papadopoulos N, Nicolaides NC, Wei Y-F et al. Mutation of
a mutL homolog in hereditary colon cancer. Science 1994; 263:
1625-9.
9. Lindblom A, Tannergird P, Werelius B, Nordenskjold M .
Genetic mapping of a second locus predisposing to hereditary
non-polyposis colon cancer. Nature Genetics 1993; 5: 279 82.
10. Ionov Y, Peinado MA, Malkhosyan S, Shibata D, Perucho M.
Ubiquitous somatic mutations in simple repeated sequences
reveal a new mechanism for colonic carcinogenesis. Nature 1993;
363: 558-61.
11. Aaltonen LA, Peltomaki PS, Leach FS et al. Clues to the pathogenesis of familial colorectal cancer. Science 1993; 260: 812-6.
12. Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, Liu B et al. Mutations of two
PMS homologues in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer.
Nature 1994; 371: 75-80.
13. Cannon-Albright LA, Skolnick MH, Bishop T, Lee RG, Burt
RW. Common inheritance of susceptibility to colonic adenomatous polyps and associated colorectal cancers. N Engl J Med
1988; 319: 533-7.

DESPERATE
IN DUBBO
T h e three physicians in Dubbo are seeking
a 4th physician to practice in Dubbo and the
surrounding region, and to share the on-call
roster at Dubbo Base Hospital.
The new physician would share responsibility
for general medical admissions, and a subspecialty interest would be welcome.
Dubbo is the regional centre for over 100,000
people. The encumbent physicians have each
been in practice in Dubbo for between 14 and
22 years.
For further information, please contact the
Medical Superintendent, Dubbo Base Hospital
(068) 85 8666 or;
Dr J. Ganalese (068) 84 5111
Dr J. Gibson (068) 82 4244
Dr D. Hammill (068) 82 4244
I

686

Aust NZ J Med 1994; 24

VAN DE WATER ET AL.

