Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

The LDL Receptor in Familial Hypercholesterolemia:
Use of Human Mutations to Dissect a Membrane Protein
D.W. RUSSELL, M . A . LEHRMAN, T.C. SLrDHOF, W. YAMAMOTO, C.G. DAVIS,
H . H . HOBBS, M.S. BROWN, AND J.L. GOLDSTEIN
Departments of Molecular Genetics and Internal Medicine, University of Texas,
Health Science Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235

The low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor is a cellsurface protein that plays an important role in the metabolism of cholesterol in humans and animals (Brown
and Goldstein 1986). This receptor binds LDL, a
plasma cholesterol transport protein, and carries it into
cells. Since its discovery 13 years ago, the LDL receptor
has proven to be a fertile system for the study of receptor-mediated endocytosis, the process by which macromolecules enter cells after binding to receptors in
coated pits (Goldstein et al. 1979). This receptor is also
of interest because its expression is regulated at the
transcriptional level by a feedback mechanism that is
responsive to the level of cholesterol in the cell (Russell
et al. 1983). A third, and so far unique, feature of the
LDL receptor is the frequent occurrence of mutations
that disrupt its structure and function. These mutations occur in patients with the genetic disease, familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH) (Goldstein et al. 1985).
When mutant receptor genes are present in the heterozygous or homozygous state, the plasma level of LDL
rises and atherosclerosis ensues.
The LDL receptor is an integral membrane protein
that is synthesized on the ribosomes of the rough endoplasmic reticulum as a 120-kD precursor that contains both N-linked and O-linked core sugars (Tolleshaug et al. 1982, 1983; Cummings et al. 1983). After
the receptor is transported to the Golgi apparatus, the
precursor sugars are processed to their mature form,
which shifts the apparent molecular mass of the protein to 160 kD, as determined by migration on SDSpolyacrylamide gels. The 160-kD LDL receptor is then
transported to the cell surface, where it clusters in
coated pits and mediates the binding and internalization of cholesterol-rich LDL particles that circulate in
plasma. The receptor and its bound ligand enter the
cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis, a process in
which coated pits invaginate to form coated vesicles.
After shedding their clathrin coats, these vesicles then
fuse with each other to form endosomes, within which
the LDL receptor and its ligand are sorted away from
each other. The LDL receptor is recycled back to the
cell surface where it again clusters in coated pits and
mediates the binding and internalization of additional
LDL particles (Brown et al. 1983). After its liberation
from the receptor in the endosome, the LDL is targeted
to the lysosome where it is degraded. The released cholesterol is used by the cell to synthesize membranes and

to regulate coordinately several genes involved in cholesterol metabolism (Goldstein et al. 1979).
Many of the steps in the complex itinerary of the
LDL receptor have been elucidated through the biochemical analysis of mutations in subjects with FH.
These mutations fall into at least four broad classes,
affecting (1) the synthesis of the receptor, (2) its transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell surface, (3) its ability to bind LDL, and (4) its ability to
cluster in clathrin-coated pits and therefore to be internalized. Over the past few years we have developed the
tools necessary to explore the molecular genetics of the
LDL receptor in FH. To this end, we purified the LDL
receptor protein (Schneider et al. 1982), isolated fulllength cDNA clones corresponding to the LDL receptor messenger RNA (Yamamoto et al. 1984), and elucidated the structure of the normal receptor gene (Sfidof et al. 1985a). These cloned DNAs in turn have been
used to determine the molecular basis of at least one
example of each of the different classes of mutations
discussed above.
In the current paper, we summarize our knowledge
of these FH mutations and indicate how their study
has revealed interesting structure-function relationships in the LDL receptor protein. We also review the
observation that many of the deletions in the LDL receptor gene involve repetitive DNA elements or Alu sequences. We suggest that recombination between two
Alu sequences accounts in part for the high population
frequency of FH.

The LDL Receptor Protein
The structure of the LDL receptor from four species
(human, bovine, rabbit, and hamster) has been elucidated through the use of protein chemistry techniques,
cDNA cloning, and DNA sequence analysis (Schneider
et al. 1982; Russell et al. 1984; Yamamoto et al. 1984,
1986; Goldstein et al. 1985; T.C. Sfidhof et al., unpubl.). These studies have revealed an evolutionarily
conserved integral membrane protein consisting of six
domains (Fig. 1). In order of appearance from the
amino-terminus, these domains are: (1) a signal sequence; (2) a ligand-binding domain; (3) a domain homologous to the epidermal growth factor (EGF) precursor; (4) a domain of clustered O-linked sugars; (5)
a transmembrane domain; and (6) a cytoplasmic do-

Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, Volume LI. @1986 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 0-87969-052-6/86 $1.00

811

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

812

RUSSELL ET AL.

Exons

I

9 2V5 v

NH2R II ~
Domains
L

4

9

7v8 9

9

9 9 t0 9 1 4 9 1 4 9

~== I lAB
,

Ligand Binding
C9 Complement Homology

9

c

L

15

J/

~6 9

17V18

~

COOH

EGF Precursor Homology
ClottingFactor Homology

Signal
Sequence

O- Linked
Sugars

Cytoplasmic

Transmembrane
Figure 1. Domain map of the human LDL receptor. A schematic diagram depicting the 860-amino-acid protein is drawn to
scale in the center. The positions at which introns interrupt the coding sequences are indicated by the arrowheads. Exons are
numbered above the drawing. Six recognizable protein domains are labeled below the figure. Proteins that have domains homologous with the various LDL receptor domains are indicated below the schematic. (Reprinted, with permission, from Sfidhof
et al. 1985a.)
main. We have assigned functional roles to several of
these domains by comparing the structure of the LDL
receptor to other membrane proteins and by the analysis of natural and artificially constructed mutations.
The first domain in the human receptor, a 21-aminoacid signal sequence, is analogous to signal sequences
in many membrane proteins (Blobel 1980). It is thought
to mediate the insertion of the nascent LDL receptor
polypeptide into the endoplasmic reticulum lumen,
thus initiating the receptor's multistep intracellular
itinerary.
The second domain, the ligand-binding domain, mediates the interaction between the receptor and lipoproteins that contain apoprotein B-100 or apoprotein
E. We have postulated that the binding function is subserved by a 292-amino-acid sequence at the amino-terminus of the mature protein. This domain is composed
of seven repeats of approximately 40 amino acids that
are arranged in a head-to-tail array (Sildhof et al.
1985a). Each repeat contains six cysteine residues that
are postulated to form three intrarepeat disulfide bonds
and a cluster of negatively charged amino acids located
at the carboxy-terminal end. The center of each repeat
is relatively hydrophobic, and it seems likely that many
of the disulfide-bonded cysteines are buried in these
hydrophobic pockets, which are flanked by polar residues. Such a conformation presumably allows the negatively charged residues to appear at the surface of the
receptor where they bind to a cluster of positively
charged amino acids on apoprotein E (Innerarity et al.
1984) or apoprotein B-100 (Knott et al. 1985).
The third domain of the LDL receptor consists of a
stretch of approximately 400 amino acids whose most
striking feature is a strong degree of sequence identity
to the EGF precursor (Russell et al. 1984; Siidhof et al.
1985b). In this homologous region, approximately 35070
of the amino acids are held in common by the two proteins. The function of this domain is unknown. However, several possibilities are being considered: (1) it
might function as part of the ligand binding domain;
(2) it might serve to extend the ligand binding domain
away from the cell surface, thus removing a steric

hindrance to the interaction of the receptor and the
large LDL particle (~o220 ,~ diameter); (3) it might play
a role in the binding of LDL receptors to each other or
to other proteins in the plane of the membrane; and (4)
it might play a role in the recycling of the LDL receptor
from the endosome back to the cell surface (Brown et
al. 1983).
The fourth domain of the LDL receptor consists of
a sequence of 58 amino acids that is highly enriched in
serine and threonine residues. Biochemical and genetic
studies have shown that this domain contains clustered
O-linked sugar chains that retard the movement of the
LDL receptor upon SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Russell et al. 1984; Davis et al. 1986b). The
function of these clustered O-linked sugars is at present not known. This region of the protein can be deleted without adverse effects on receptor function in
cultured fibroblasts (Davis et al. 1986b). It is conceivable that in other cell types these clustered O-linked
sugars play a critical role in LDL receptor function or
turnover. For instance, in polarized epithelial cells, they
may serve as targeting signals for movement of the receptor to the basolateral or apical cell surface.
In addition to the clustered O-linked sugars, the LDL
receptor contains a few scattered O-linked sugar chains
that are located in different parts of the molecule. Their
precise location is as yet unknown (Davis et al. 1986b).
Kingsley et al. (1986) studied a line of mutant Chinese
hamster cells that are unable to synthesize O-linked
sugars as a result of a deficiency of U D P - G a l / U D P GalNAc-4-epimerase. These workers found that Olinked sugars play a role in stabilizing the LDL receptor. When O-linked sugars were not present, LDL receptors were synthesized and apparently reached the
cell surface, but were rapidly degraded. Inasmuch as
deletion of the clustered O-linked sugar domain did not
affect receptor stability (Davis et al. 1986b), the findings of Kingsley et al. (1986) suggest that loss of the
scattered O-linked sugars is responsible for the unstable receptors produced in the epimerase-deficient hamster cells. Alternatively, it is possible that the instability
of the LDL receptors in the epimerase-deficient ham-

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

LDL R E C E P T O R MUTATIONS IN F H
ster cells is attributable to tl~e lack of O-linked sugars
on some other membrane protein or intracellular escort protein whose activity is necessary to prevent the
receptor from being degraded.
The fifth domain of the LDL receptor consists of
22-25 hydrophobic amino acids that span the membrane, thus anchoring the protein. The deletion of this
region in certain naturally occurring mutations results
in the secretion of LDL receptors from the cell (Lehrman et al. 1985b). A comparison of membrane-spanning domains from LDL receptors of four different
species reveals the maintenance of a hydrophobic character, but little actual sequence conservation (Goldstein et al. 1985; Yamamoto et al. 1986; T.C. Siidhof et
al., unpubl.). Thus, it is unlikely that the transmembrane segment has a specific function, such as transducing a signal across the plasma membrane (after ligand binding) or serving as an ion channel. These
conclusions are consistent with the finding that the
LDL receptor recycles constitutively in the absence of
ligand (Basu et al. 1981) and thus does not require that
a signal be transduced to the cytoplasmic domain for
internalization to occur.
The last domain of the LDL receptor is found at the
extreme carboxyl terminus of the molecule and consists of 50 amino acids that are located on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane (Russell et al.
1984). The analysis of naturally occurring and artificial mutations has revealed that this domain targets the
LDL receptor to coated pits in the plasma membrane
(Lehrman et al. 1985a; Davis et al. 1986a). The proteins with which the LDL receptor interacts in the
coated pit are at present not known, nor is it known
whether other receptors that cluster in coated pits bind
to the same or different proteins.
The Human LDL Receptor Gene
The human LDL receptor locus spans approximately
45 kb of DNA on the distal short arm (band p13.1p13.3) of chromosome 19 (Lindgren et al. 1985). The
gene is divided into 18 exons and 17 introns (Stidhof et
al. 1985a) (Fig. 1). There is a strong correlation between structural domains in the protein and exon sequences in the LDL receptor gene. The signal sequence
is neatly encoded by the first exon, and many of the
repeat units in the ligand binding domain are encoded
by discrete exons. The E G F precursor domain is specified by eight exons that are distributed similarly in the
LDL receptor and the E G F precursor genes (Sfidhof et
al. 1985b). The O-linked sugar domain is encoded by a
discrete exon, and the membrane-spanning and cytoplasmic domains are each encoded by two exons. The
most 3' exon encodes the 12 amino acids at the carboxyl
terminus of the protein plus a long 3' untranslated region (2.5 kb) that includes several Alu repetitive elements (Yamamoto et al. 1984; Hobbs et al. 1985).
Comparison of the LDL receptor with published sequences of other proteins revealed that the receptor
gene is a mosaic of coding sequences shared with sev-

813

eral other proteins (Fig. 2). Parts of the EGF homology
region are also found in three plasma proteases involved in blood clotting (factor IX, factor X, and protein C). In addition, the 40-amino-acid, cysteine-rich
repeat unit of the LDL binding domain is found in
complement component C9 (Stanley et al. 1985; Stidhof et al. 1985a). In each of these proteins, the shared
sequences are encoded by discrete exons (Fig. 2). These
findings support the exon-shuffling hypothesis of Gilbert (1978) and indicate that the LDL receptor is a
member of at least two supergene families, one containing the segments encoding the E G F precursor region and the other containing the segment shared with
complement component C9 (Doolittle 1985; Stidhof et
al. 1985a).
Mutations in the LDL Receptor Gene
To date, we have mapped or sequenced 11 mutations
in the LDL receptor genes of FH patients. As expected
from the heterogeneity of other human genetic diseases, a plethora of molecular defects in the receptor
gene have been found, including insertion, deletion,
nonsense, and missense mutations (Fig. 3). Inasmuch
as the alterations disrupt different domains of the LDL
receptor, they have different consequences for the
binding or receptor-mediated endocytosis of LDL.
Four of the deletion mutations in the LDL receptor
gene have been analyzed by cloning and sequencing of
the deletion joint. Three of these mutations (FH 274,
FH 626, FH 781) involve homologous recombinations
between two Alu sequences (Lehrman et al. 1985b;
Hobbs et al. 1986; M.A. Lehrman et al., in prep.). The
fourth (FH 381) is a recombination between one Alu
sequence and a sequence in an exon that by chance is
homologous to the Alu sequence (Lehrman et al. 1986).
In two of the recombinations (FH 274 and F H 381), the
complementary elements were oriented in opposite directions (Lehrman et al. 1985b, 1986). In both cases it
was possible to draw a double stem-loop (clover leaf)
structure between these complementary sequences.
These findings suggest that complex stem-loop structures may predispose to large deletions in the human
genome (Lehrman et al. 1986).
Recombination between Alu sequences in the same
orientation caused the deletions found in FH 626 and
F H 781 (Fig. 3, legend) (Hobbs et al. 1986; M.A. Lehrman et al.; in prep.). The simplest mechanism that
could give rise to these mutations is one of homologous
recombination in which unequal crossing over follows
mispairing of chromatids. These unequal crossing-over
events should also produce genes with duplications of
the regions that are deleted from the FH 626 and F H
781 alleles. These duplications have not yet been found.
A total of seven Alu sequences have been observed
to be involved in mutations in the LDL receptor gene.
Three Alu sequences have been reported to be involved
in mutations in globin genes (Jagadeeswaran et al.
1982; Ottolenghi and Giglioni 1982; Vanin et al. 1983).
Remarkably, the deletion end points are not located at

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

814

R U S S E L L E T AL.
Membrane

Receptor

EGF
Precursor

o ,or

DD DDII DDDDI
I

III

0DDll

Dill

I

Dill

I

Figure 2. Exon shuffling in the LDL receptor. The human LDL receptor is shown at the top. Exons that encode sequences
shared with other genes are indicated by the small blocks. Roman numerals I-VII indicate the seven repeats in the ligand binding
domain. Hatched blocks represent exons encoding these repeats, one of which is found in complement component C9. Capital
letters (A-C) and black boxes indicate three repeats encoded by discrete exons in the EGF precursor homology domain. One or
more copies of these repeats are found in the EGF precursor, factor IX, factor X, and protein C genes. The speckled boxes
indicate exons that are shared only by the LDL receptor and EGF precursor genes. The positions of the membrane-spanning
regions of the LDL receptor and EGF precursor are shown. The other proteins are secreted directly and have no membranous
component.

r a n d o m t h r o u g h o u t the Alu sequences, b u t r a t h e r are
clustered (M.A. L e h r m a n et al., in prep). E i g h t of the
10 d e l e t i o n e n d p o i n t s m a p w i t h i n a 36-bp sequence in
the left a r m o f the Alu repeat. T h e s e sequences fall
b e t w e e n the A a n d B b l o c k s t h a t c o n s t i t u t e the b i p a r tite R N A p o l y m e r a s e III p r o m o t e r in the Alu element
(Paolella et al. 1983). It is t e m p t i n g to speculate t h a t
t h e i n t e r a c t i o n o f a t r a n s c r i p t i o n f a c t o r with A a n d B

+2kb

Exon
No.

4

2

sequences m i g h t lead to a n increased susceptibility o f
this region to enzymes o f D N A r e c o m b i n a t i o n .

FH Mutations Reveal Structure-Function
Relationships in the LDL Receptor
M u t a t i o n s in the L D L r e c e p t o r gene in F H p a t i e n t s
have p r o v i d e d insight i n t o f u n c t i o n a l d o m a i n s in t h e

+ 4 nt

-12bp -27bp

3

4

5 6

- 0 . 8 kb

7 8 910
-4kb

"1112 '1314

15

- 5 kb

16 17

48

-5.5 kb
- 7.8 kb
It

~IF Insertion
-4-~Deletion
9

Nonsense

9

Missense

Figure 3. Mutations in the LDL receptor gene. Exons are shown as hatched boxes and introns as the lines connecting them. The
map is not drawn to scale. Mutations that have been mapped or cloned are indicated above and below the gene. The mutations
are: 2-kb insertion in intron 1 (FH 295), 12-bp deletion in exon 4 (WHHL rabbit), ,'027-bp deletion in exon 4 (FH 563), nonsense
mutation in exon 14 (FH 264, 550, 786, 793), nonsense mutation in exon 17 (FH 683), 4-bp insertion in exon 17 (FH 763), missense
mutation in exon 17 (FH 380), deletion of 0.8 kb (FH 626), deletion of 4 kb (FH 359 and FH 454), deletion of 5 kb (FH 381),
deletion of 7.8 kb (FH 781), and deletion of 5.5 kb (FH 274). See text for further details and references.

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

LDL R E C E P T O R MUTATIONS IN F H
protein. To date, fibroblasts from 115 patients (230 alleles) with the clinical syndrome of homozygous FH
have been analyzed with a battery of immunochemical
and functional assays. These studies reveal four broad
classes of mutations (Fig. 4). The first and most prevalent class comprises mutant alleles that fail to produce an immunoprecipitable protein (null alleles). More
than half of the fibroblast strains harbor at least one
null allele (Goldstein et al. 1985). Class 2 mutations
encode proteins blocked in intracellular transport between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. Fifty-four of our 115 fibroblast strains harbor at
least one allele specifying a transport-deficient LDL
receptor. Class 3 mutant alleles encode proteins that
are synthesized and transported, but fail to bind LDL
normally. This is an extremely heterogeneous group;
affected individuals from different families show
widely varying levels of LDL binding activity that range
from < 2% of normal to 30% of normal. Class 4 mutations, although the rarest, have been most revealing
with respect to the mechanisms of receptor-mediated
endocytosis. These alleles encode proteins that are efficiently synthesized and transported to the cell surface. These receptors bind LDL normally, but their
ability to cluster in coated pits is deficient and thus
these receptors do not internalize bound LDL.
We have characterized at the molecular level at least
one member from each of the four classes of mutations
in the LDL receptor gene. These results are summarized below.

f

815

Class 1 mutations: Null alleles. Two classes of null
alleles exist: (1) those that contain detectable mRNA
and (2) those that lack mRNA. So far, about one-third
of FH homozygotes whose fibroblasts do not synthesize immunoprecipitable receptor protein also fail to
produce detectable mRNA. Figure 5 shows an experiment in which total RNA isolated from primary diploid fibroblasts from four FH subjects and one normal
subject were subjected to electrophoresis on an agarose
gel, transferred to a nylon membrane, and hybridized
with 32p-labeled single-stranded M13-derived cDNA
probes (Russell and Yamamoto 1986). To ensure that
the FH RNA was intact, a radiolabeled cDNA probe
derived from human fl-actin mRNA (Gunning et al.
1983) was included in the hybridization. In RNA isolated from normal fibroblasts, these probes detect a
5.3-kb mRNA derived from the human LDL receptor
gene and a 1.9-kb mRNA derived from the fl-actin
gene. In RNAs isolated from the FH cell strains, no
LDL receptor mRNA is detected even though equivalent amounts of ~-actin mRNA are present in all samples (Fig. 5). Southern blotting analysis of DNA isolated from these four FH cell strains revealed that three
of them (FH 49, 549, and 808) have a large deletion
that removes the promoter of the LDL receptor gene
(H. Hobbs et al., unpubl.). These three subjects are of
French-Canadian descent, and thus the deletion may
represent a common allele in FH subjects from this
ethnic background.
As described above, we have cloned and characterized another null allele (FH 381) in which a 5-kb deletion removes exons 13-15 of the gene. The truncated
RNA encoded by this allele is present in the cell, but
no immunoprecipitable protein can be detected (Lehrman et al. 1986). This mutation therefore represents an
example of a null allele in which mRNA is produced.

Ecu

~

o

I

-r

-r

-r

h

h

IJ_

I,L

L~

Z
E NDOPLAS M IC
RETICULUM

00 E
~_

o

Z

LDL Receptor
COATED
PiT

Class
of
Mutation

(9
|

Synthesis

Transport
framER
to
Golgi

Binding Clustering
of
in
LDL
Coated Pits

X
-------~X
~X
I

I

._

Ir x

Figure 4. Four classes of mutations at the LDL receptor locus. These mutations disrupt synthesis, transport, binding,
and clustering of the LDL receptor. See text for a detailed
description of specific mutant alleles in each class. (Reprinted, with permission, from Goldstein and Brown 1984.)

/3- Actin
Figure 5. Analysis of four null alleles at LDL receptor locus
by RNA blotting. Total RNA (10 #g) was isolated from fibroblasts that were incubated for 24 hr in the presence of lipoprotein-deficient serum and 10/zM compactin, a drug that inhibits cholesterol synthesis. This regimen gives a maximal
induction of LDL receptor mRNA. RNA samples from the
indicated cell line were subjected to electrophoresis on an
agarose gel, transferred to a nylon membrane, and probed
with radiolabeled cDNA of the human LDL receptor and ~actin mRNAs. The postions to which the normal LDL receptor mRNA (5.3 kb) and actin mRNA (1.9 kb) migrated are
indicated by the arrows.

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

816

R U S S E L L ET AL.

In other instances we have observed individuals in
whom normal amounts of a normal-sized m R N A are
present, but no immunoprecipitable receptor is produced. Whether these alleles represent simple nonsense
mutations or other more complex abnormalities is unknown.

Class 2 mutations: Transport-deficient alleles. We
have recently determined the molecular basis of three
mutations that encode LDL receptors that accumulate
in the endoplasmic reticulum (Yamamoto et al. 1986;
M.A. Lehrman et al., in prep.). In two of the mutations
(Yamamoto et al. 1986), small in-frame deletions (12
bp and ~27 bp) occur in exon 4, which encodes three
repeats of the ligand binding domain (Fig. 3). One of
these mutations was identified in the Watanabe-heritable hyperlipidemic (WHHL) rabbit, an animal model
of FH. It removed four residues (Asp-Gly-Ser-Asp)
from the third repeat in the binding domain. Another
mutation was characterized by S 1 nuclease mapping of
the LDL receptor m R N A in fibroblasts from an FH
patient (FH 563). The findings were suggestive of a
deletion of approximately nine amino acids in the fifth
binding repeat (Fig. 3).
A third class 2 mutation (FH 264) arises from a single base substitution that produces a nonsense codon
within exon 14 (Fig. 3), which normally encodes a repeated cysteine-rich sequence in the E G F precursor homology domain (repeat C, Fig. 1). The FH 264 protein
migrates on SDS gels with an apparent molecular mass
of 95 kD (Tolleshaug et al. 1983). Premature termination within this cysteine-rich region is postulated to
leave two unpaired cysteine residues at the extreme carboxyl terminus of the C repeat (M.A. Lehrman et al.,
in prep.).
Why do these alterations disrupt the transport of the
receptor to the cell surface? All three of the mutations
would be expected to distort the receptor in such a way
that some of the cysteines can no longer form disulfide
bonds. If these unpaired cysteine residues are located
on the surface of the protein, they might be available
for complexing to another protein that retards movement to the surface. Alternatively, the improperly
folded protein might bind noncovalently to a hypothetical "gatekeeper" protein whose function is to prevent
the transport of improperly folded proteins to the cell
surface (Yamamoto et al. 1986). The small amounts of
LDL receptor present in these mutant cells have so far
prevented the demonstration of such a hypothetical
gatekeeper protein, if indeed it exists.
Class 3 mutations: Binding-deficient alleles. Two
representatives of this class have been analyzed at the
molecular level. One mutation, F H 626 was brought
about by unequal crossing over between Alu sequences
in introns 4 and 5, thereby deleting a segment of 0.8 kb
that includes exon 5 (Fig. 3). In the resultant mRNA,
exon 4 is spliced to exon 6, preserving the reading
frame. This m R N A produces a shortened protein that
lacks the sixth repeat in the ligand binding domain.
The receptor reaches the cell surface and reacts with

anti-receptor antibodies but does not bind LDL, which
contains apoprotein B-100 as its major protein component. Surprisingly, the deleted protein retains the
ability to bind and internalize another lipoprotein
called H-migrating very-low-density lipoprotein (/3VLDL). This lipoprotein binds to the LDL receptor
with higher affinity than LDL because it contains multiple copies of apoprotein E, a high-affinity ligand for
the receptor (Mahley and Innerarity 1983). The loss of
LDL binding is consistent with the hypothesis that the
seven repeated sequences constitute the LDL binding
domain. The data further indicate that the sixth repeat
is required for binding of LDL, but not ~-VLDL, and
that deletion of a single cysteine-rich repeat can alter
the binding specificity of the receptor.
A similar phenotype is manifest in two siblings with
homozygous FH (FH 359 and FH 454) in which a deletion of 4 kb removed exons 7 and 8 from the LDL receptor gene (C.G. Davis et al., in prep.). Exons 7 and 8
normally encode the cysteine-rich A and B repeats of
the EGF precursor homology domain (Fig. 1). In the
FH 454 mRNA, exon 6 is apparently spliced directly to
exon 9, again preserving the reading frame of the LDL
receptor. The resultant protein is transported to the cell
surface normally but does not bind LDL. It does, however, retain an ability to bind/3-VLDL. These data suggest that the A and B repeats of the EGF precursor
region play some role in the binding of LDL, but the
nature of this role is completely unknown at present.
It is important to note that the FH 626 and FH 454
receptors have deletions of cysteine-rich domains, but
they are not blocked in transport to the cell surface.
This is in contrast to the W H H L rabbit and FH 563, in
which a small deletion that removes part of a cysteinerich repeat blocks transport. These data suggest that
each cysteine-rich repeat folds independently. When
one entire repeat is deleted, there are no unpaired cysteines. When part of a repeat is deleted, the remaining
portion of the repeat contains unpaired cysteines and
this accounts for the block in transport. This hypothesis is being tested directly through the use of site-directed mutagenesis of LDL receptor cDNAs.

Class 4 mutations: Internalization-defective alleles. The discovery of internalization-defective alleles in 1976 led to the hypothesis that a defect in a
(then hypothetical) cytoplasmic domain of the receptor
might impair targeting to the coated pit (Brown and
Goldstein 1976; Anderson et al. 1977). To date, we have
cloned and sequenced five different internalization-defective alleles at the LDL receptor locus and all of these
have alterations that affect the cytoplasmic domain
(Lehrman et al. 1985a,b; Davis et al. 1986a; M.A.
Lehrman et al., in prep.).
The molecular analysis of the internalization defects
has resulted in a subclassification of internalizationdefective mutations. The first subclass includes three
mutations that alter only the sequence of the cytoplasmic domain (Fig. 6). One of these (FH 683) is a
truncation of the cytoplasmic domain due to a non-

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

LDL R E C E P T O R MUTATIONS IN F H
FH 3 8 0 - J.D.

817

FH 763

~,yToplasm

FH 683

Q

Trp

+

~Q

Nonsense

+
-I- Ly
--

GI,

+

Hi

Frameshift
( insertion
of 4 bases)

GI
Gb
+

Hi
GI

+

C=O
I
OH

Figure 6. Mutations affecting the cytoplasmic domain of the LDL receptor in three FH homozygotes with the internalizationdefective form of FH. (Reprinted, with permission, from Brown and Goldstein 1986.)

sense mutation at amino acid 792. The resulting LDL
receptor has only two of the normal 50 amino acids in
the cytoplasmic domain. This mutation results in an
almost complete block in the internalization of receptor-bound LDL (Lehrman et al. 1985a; Davis et al.
1986a). A second mutation (FH 763) results from a duplication of 4 bp in exon 17. This insertion shifts the
reading frame of the m R N A and results in the synthesis of an LDL receptor with six of the normal 50 amino
acids and eight novel amino acids in the cytoplasmic
domain (Lehrman et al. 1985a). A third and most revealing internalization-defective allele in this subclass
is found in FH 380 (Fig. 6). Here, a single-base-pair
change results in the substitution of a cysteine residue
for a tyrosine residue at position 807 (Davis et al.
1986a). We have hypothesized that this substitution alters the structure of the cytoplasmic domain so that it
can no longer bind properly to a protein that normally
mediates its incorporation into coated pits.
The second subclass of internalization-defective alleles includes two examples, F H 781 and FH 274 (Fig.
3). Here, deletions remove exons 16-18, which encode
the membrane-spanning domain as well as the cytoplasmic domain. In the FH 274 and FH781 mutations,
about 90% of these truncated receptors are secreted
into the culture medium (Lehrman et al. 1985b). Genomic cloning, DNA sequencing, and S1 nuclease
mapping studies indicate that exons 1-15 of the gene
are present in the m R N A and specify the amino-terminal 749 amino acids of the normal protein (M.A.
Lehrman et al., in prep.). The deletions affect the ability of the receptor m R N A to splice properly after exon

15, thus causing translation to proceed into intron 15.
This read-through produces a receptor with 55 novel
amino acids at its carboxyl terminus. Inspection of this
sequence reveals a stretch of 14 amino acids with a hydrophobic nature that could encode a pseudo-transmembrane domain. It is possible that this novel transmembrane domain might function inefficiently, thus
retaining only 10% of the LDL receptors within the
cell while the other 90% are secreted. This hypothesis
is currently being tested in our laboratory.

SUMMARY
Since the discovery of the LDL receptor 13 years ago,
a multidisciplinary approach to its study has revealed
much about this important cell-surface protein. Most
recently, we have developed tools in the form of fulllength cDNAs and cloned genomic DNAs necessary to
understand the molecular genetics of this locus. The
frequent occurrence of mutations in the LDL receptor
gene in patients with FH provides a fertile ground on
which to explore the parts of the receptor that are necessary for its function. The analysis of four large deletions has revealed an unexpectedly universal involvement of Alu repeats in their generation. These studies
indicate that repetitive DNAs can destabilize a gene
through homologous recombination. Inasmuch as the
LDL receptor gene is a mosaic of exons shared with at
least five other proteins, it is possible that early exonshuffling events involved recombination between these
repetitive elements. Is it possible that the very plasticity
that permitted evolution of the LDL receptor also ac-

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

818

R U S S E L L ET AL.

counts for its frequent disruption by mutation? Further study may help to answer this question.
Mutations that disrupt the structure of the protein
have been identified. The biochemical and cellular
consequences of these mutations reveal crucial aspects
of receptor structure. The receptor is clearly divided
into quasi-independent domains with discrete functions. Mutations that disrupt the cytoplasmic domain
alter the ability of the LDL receptor to cluster in coated
pits, but they do not disrupt ligand binding or produce
major effects on intracellular transport. Some of the
mutations in the external domain disrupt binding but
do not affect transport or internalization. Other mutations disrupt transport to the surface without abolishing binding. Some domains of the protein appear to
function in a cooperative manner. Thus, deletions in
the EGF precursor homology domain affect the ability
of the receptor to bind LDL, indicating that this domain acts in collaboration with the actual amino-terminal binding domain.
Clearly, further study of these human mutations will
tell us much about the structure and function of the
LDL receptor and probably other membrane proteins
as well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by research grants from the
National Institutes of Health (HL 20948 and HL 31346)
and the Moss Heart Foundation; a Research Career
Development Award from the National Institutes of
Health (HL 01287) to D.W.R.; a postdoctoral fellowship from the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund for
Medical Research to M.A.L.; a postdoctoral fellowship from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to
T.C.S.; a postdoctoral fellowship from the National
Institutes of Health (HL 06660) to C.G.D.; and a postdoctoral fellowship from the National Institutes of
Health (AM 07307) to H . H . H .
REFERENCES
Anderson, R.G.W., J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown. 1977. A
mutation that impairs the ability of lipoprotein receptors
to localise in coated pits on the cell surface of human fibroblasts. Nature 270: 695.
Basu, S.K., J.L. Goldstein, R.G.W. Anderson, and M.S.
Brown. 1981. Monensin interrupts the recycling of low
density lipoprotein receptors in human fibroblasts. Cell
24: 493.
Blobel, G. 1980. Intracellular protein topogenesis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 77: 1496.
Brown, M.S. and J.L. Goldstein. 1976. Analysis of a mutant
strain of human fibroblasts with a defect in the internalization of receptor-bound low density lipoprotein. Cell
9: 663.
--.
1986. A receptor-mediated pathway for cholesterol
homeostasis. Science 232: 34.
Brown, M.S., R.G.W. Anderson, and J.L. Goldstein. 1983.
Recycling receptors: The round-trip itinerary of migrant
membrane proteins. Cell 32: 663.
Cummings, R.D., S. Kornfeld, W.J. Schneider, K.K.
Hobgood, H. Tolleshaug, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. 1983. Biosynthesis of the N- and O-linked oligosac-

charides of the low density lipoprotein receptor. J. Biol.
Chem. 258: 15261.
Davis, C.G., M.A. Lehrman, D.W. Russell, R.G.W. Anderson, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. 1986a. The J.D.
mutation in familial hypercholesterolemia: Substitution of
cysteine for tyrosine in cytoplasmic domain impedes internalization of LDL receptors. Cell 45: 15.
Davis, C.G., A. Elhammer, D.W. Russell, W.J. Schneider, S.
Kornfeld, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. 1986b. Deletion of clustered O-linked carbohydrates does not impair
function of low density lipoprotein receptor in transfected
fibroblasts. J. BioL Chem. 261: 2828.
Deininger, P.L., D.J. Jolly, C.M. Rubin, T. Friedmann, and
C.W. Schmid. 1981. Base sequence studies of 300 nucleotide renatured repeated human DNA clones. J. Mol. Biol.
151: 17.
Doolittle, R.E 1985. The genealogy of some recently evolved
vertebrate proteins. Trends Biochem. Sci. 10: 233.
Gilbert, W. 1978. Why genes in pieces? Nature 271: 501.
Goldstein, J.L. and M.S. Brown. 1984. Progress in understanding the LDL receptor and HMG CoA reductase, two
membrane proteins that regulate the plasma cholesterol.
J. Lipid Res. 25: 1450.
Goldstein, J.L., R.G.W. Anderson, and M.S. Brown. 1979.
Coated pits, coated vesicles, and receptor-mediated endocytosis. Nature 279: 679.
Goldstein, J.L., M.S. Brown, R.G.W. Anderson, D.W. Russell, and W.J. Schneider. 1985. Receptor-mediated endocytosis: Concepts emerging from the LDL receptor system. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 1: 1.
Gunning, P., P. Ponte, H. Okayama, J. Engel, H. Blau, and
L. Kedes. 1983. Isolation and characterization of fulllength cDNA clones for human c~-, 13-, and ~/-actin
mRNAs: Skeletal but not cytoplasmic actins have an
amino-terminal cysteine that is subsequently removed.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 3: 787.
Hobbs, H.H., M.S. Brown, J.L. Goldstein, and D.W. Russell.
1986. Deletion of exon encoding cysteine-rich repeat of
LDL receptor alters its binding specificity in a subject with
familial hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. (in press).
Hobbs, H.H., M.A. Lehrman, T. Yamamoto, and D.W. Russell. 1985. Polymorphism and evolution of Alu sequences
in the human low density lipoprotein receptor gene. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 82: 7651.
Innerarity, T.L., K.H. Weisgraber, K.S. Arnold, S.C. Rall,
Jr., and R.W. Mahley. 1984. Normalization of receptor
binding of apolipoprotein E2: Evidence for modulation of
the binding site conformation. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 7261.
Jagadeeswaran, P., D. Tuan, B.G. Forget, and S.M. Weissman. 1982. A gene deletion ending at the midpoint of a
repetitive DNA sequence in one form of hereditary persistance of fetal haemoglobin. Nature 296: 469.
Kingsley, D:M., K.E Kozarsky, L. Hobbie, and H. Krieger.
1986. Reversible defects in O-linked glycosylation and LDL
receptor expression in a UDP-Gal/UDP-GalNAc 4-epimerase deficient mutant. Cell 44: 749.
Knott, T.J., S.C. Rail, Jr., T.L. Innerarity, S.E Jacobson, M.S.
Urdea, B. Levy-Wilson, L.M. Powell, R.J. Pease, R. Eddy,
H. Nakai, M. Byers, L.M. Priestley, E. Robertson, L.B.
Rall, C. Betsholtz, T.B. Shows, R.W. Mahley, and J. Scott.
1985. Human apolipoprotein B: Structure of carboxyl-terminal domains, sites of gene expression, and chromosomal localization. Science 230: 37.
Lehrman, M.A., D.W. Russell, J.L. Goldstein, and M.S.
Brown. 1986. Exon-Alu recombination deletes 5 kilobases
from low density lipoprotein receptor gene, producing null
phenotype in familial hypercholesterolemia. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 83: 3679.
Lehrman, M.A., J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, D.W. Russell,
and W.J. Schneider. 1985a. Internalization-defective LDL
receptors produced by genes with nonsense and frameshift
mutations that truncate the cytoplasmic domain. Cell
41: 735.

Downloaded from symposium.cshlp.org on November 14, 2012 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press

LDL RECEPTOR MUTATIONS IN FH
Lehrman, M.A., W.J. Schneider, T.C. Siidhof, M.S. Brown,
J.L. Goldstein, and D.W. Russell. 1985b. Mutation in LDL
receptor: Alu-Alu recombination deletes exons encoding
transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. Science
227: 140.
Lindgren, V., K.L. Luskey, D.W. Russell, and U. Francke.
1985. Human genes involved in cholesterol metabolism:
Chromosomal mapping of the loci for the low density lipoprotein receptor and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase with cDNA probes. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 82: 8567.
Mahley, R.W. and T.L. Innerarity. 1983. Lipoprotein receptors and cholesterol homeostasis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta.
737: 197.
Ottolenghi, S. and B. Giglioni. 1982. The deletion in a type
of/i~176
begins in an inverted AluI repeat. Nature 300: 770.
Paolella, G., M.A. Lucero, M.H. Murphy, and EE. Baralle.
1983. The Alu family repeat promoter has a tRNA-like bipartite structure. EMBO J. 2: 691.
Russell, D.W. and T. Yamamoto. 1986. Molecular cloning of
bovine LDL receptor cDNA. Methods Enzymol. 128: 895.
Russell, D.W., W.J. Schneider, T. Yamamoto, K.L. Luskey,
M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. 1984. Domain map of
the LDL receptor: Sequence homology with the epidermal
growth factor precursor. Cell 37: 577.
Russell, D.W., T. Yamamoto, W.J. Schneider, C.J. Slaughter,
M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. 1983. cDNA cloning of
the bovine low density lipoprotein receptor: Feedback regulation of a receptor mRNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 80:
7501.
Schneider, W.J., U. Beisiegel, J.L. Goldstein, and M.S. Brown.
1982. Purification of the low density lipoprotein receptor,

819

an acidic glycoprotein of 164,000 molecular weight. J.
Biol. Chem. 257: 2664.
Stanley, K.K., H.-P. Kocher, J.P. Luzio, P. Jackson, and J.
Tschopp. 1985. The sequence and toplogy of human complement component C9. EMBO J. 4: 375.
Siidhof, T.C., J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, and D.W. Russell.
1985a. The LDL receptor gene: A mosaic of exons shared
with different proteins. Science 228: 815.
Stidhof, T.C., D.W. Russell, J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, R.
Sanchez-Pescador, and G.I. Bell. 1985b. Cassette of eight
exons shared by genes for LDL receptor and EGF precursor. Science 220: 893.
Tolleshaug, H., J.L. Goldstein, W.J. Schneider, and M.S.
Brown. 1982. Posttranslational processing of the LDL receptor and its genetic disruption in familial hypercholesterolemia. Cell 30: 715.
Tolleshaug, H., K.K. Hobgood, M.S. Brown, and J.L. Goldstein. 1983. The LDL receptor locus in familial hypercholesterolemia: Multiple mutations disrupting the transport
and processing of a membrane receptor. Cell 32: 941.
Vanin, E.E, P.S. Henthorn, D. Kioussis, E Grosveld, and O.
Smithies. 1983. Unexpected relationships between four
large deletions in the human ~-globin gene cluster. Cell
35: 701.
Yamamoto, T., R.W. Bishop, M.S. Brown, J.L. Goldstein, and
D.W. Russell. 1986. Deletion in cysteine-rich region of LDL
receptor impedes transport to cell surface in WHHL rabbit. Science 232: 1230.
Yamamoto, T., C.G. Davis, M.S. Brown, W.J. Schneider, M.L.
Casey, J.L. Goldstein, and D.W. Russell. 1984. The human
LDL receptor: A cysteine-rich protein with multiple Alu
sequences in its mRNA. Cell 39: 27.

