Cell, Vol. 71, 939-953,

December

11, 1992, Copyright

0 1992 by Cell Press

ERCCG, a Member of a Subfamily of Putative
Helicases, Is Involved in Cockaynes Syndrome
and Preferential Repair of Active Genes
Christine Troelstra, Alain van Gool, Jan de Wit,
Wim Vermeulen, Dlrk Bootsma,
and Jan H. J. Hoeijmakers
Medical Genetics Center
Department of Cell Biology and Genetics
Erasmus University
3000DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands

Summary
Cells from patients with the UV-sensitive nucleotide
excision repair disorder Cockayne’s syndrome (CS)
have a specific defect in preferential repair of lesions
from the transcribed strand of active genes. This system permits quick resumption of transcription
after
UV exposure. Here we report the characterization
of
ERCCG, a gene involved in preferential repair in eukaryotes. ERCCG corrects the repair defect of CS complementation group B (CSB). It encodes a protein of
1493 amino acids, containing seven consecutive domains conserved between DNA and RNA helicases.
The entire helicase region bears striking homology to
segments in recently discovered proteins involved in
transcription
regulation, chromosome
stability, and
DNA repair. Mutation analysis of a CS-B patient indicates that the gene is not essential for cell viability
and is specific for preferential repair of transcribed
sequences.
Introduction
The genetic information of an organism is continually subjected to the damaging effects of environmental and internal genotoxic agents, chemical instability, and the inherent imperfection of DNA metabolizing processes. If
unrepaired, such DNA injury will lead to mutations, carcinogenesis, general deterioration of cell functioning,
and cell death. To counteract these deleterious consequences, an intricate network of DNA repair systems has
evolved (for review see Friedberg, 1985). Among the most
important and best-studied repair mechanisms, both in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, is the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway. This system eliminates a remarkably
broad spectrum of structurally unrelated lesions, such as
ultraviolet (UV)-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
(CPD) and (6-4) photoproducts, bulky chemical adducts,
and DNA cross-links. Removal of these lesions proceeds
via a multistep reaction, which is resolved to considerable
detail in the bacterium Escherichia coli (van Houten,
1990): a UvrA,B helicase complex scans the DNA for structural distortions by locally unwinding the two strands (Oh
and Grossman, 1987) and delivers the UvrB subunit to the
lesion (Orren and Sancar, 1989). UvrC interacts with the
damage-specific UvrB-DNA complex and catalyzes incision of the damaged strand on both sides of the injury.

Release of the lesion-containing 12-13 nt oligomer, as
well as the bound UvrC, is performed by UvrD (helicase
II), after which DNA polymerase I turns over UvrB and
fills the resulting single-stranded gap (Orren et al., 1992).
Finally, the newly synthesized repair patch is ligated to the
parental DNA. Knowledge of the molecular mechanism of
NER in eukaryotes is rapidly accumulating. Recently, a
dual incision has been demonstrated (Huang et al., 1992)
and several proteins required for pre- or postincision steps
were identified (Shivji et al., 1992).
The prototype repair disorder xeroderma pigmentosum
(XP) illustrates the phenotypic consequences of defective
NER. Patients suffering from this rare recessive inherited
disease characteristically exhibit extreme sun (UV) sensitivity, pigmentation abnormalities, predisposition to skin
cancer, and frequently progressive neurological degeneration (Cleaver and Kraemer, 1989). Extensive genetic heterogeneity was disclosed by cell hybridization with the
identification of at least seven excision-deficient complementation groups (XP-A to XP-G) (de Weerd-Kastelein et
al., 1972; Vermeulen et al., 1991). The biochemical basis
for the XP NER defect probably resides in undefined early
steps of the pathway preceding incision and repair synthesis (Shivji et al., 1992).
An immediate and urgent effect of the presence of lesions in DNA is interruption of the vital process of transcription (Mayne and Lehmann, 1982). To release this
otherwise lethal block, a sophisticated NER subpathway
appears to operate that primarily focuses on the rapid and
preferential removal of certain lesions (from the transcribed
strand of) active genes. This NER process was first discovered in mammalian cells (Bohr et al., 1985) and found to
explain the apparent paradox that rodent cells perform
only a fraction of CPD removal compared with human cell
lines, yet they exhibit the same degree of UV resistance
(Zelle et al., 1980; van Zeeland et al., 1981). It appeared
that rodent lines mainly rely on the strand-selective repair
of active genes and are largely deficient in the NER subpathway that is responsible for the slower and incomplete
removal of CPD from the genome overall (including the
nontranscribed strand) (Bohr et al., 1985; Mellon et al.,
1987). Human cells are proficient for both processes (Mellon et al., 1986, 1987; Venema et al., 1990b). This demonstrates the importance for cell survival of preferential repair of the small but vital active compartment of the
genome. Recent analysis of mutations in various genes
has provided evidence that strand-selective repair also
contributes significantly to prevention of mutagenesis originating from this strand in cultured cells (Vrieling et al.,
1991). The universality of preferential repair is demonstrated by the recent discovery that in yeast and E. coli
also the transcribed strand is more rapidly cleared from
CPD lesions than the nontranscribed strand (Mellon and
Hanawalt, 1989; Smerdon and Thoma, 1990). These observations suggest that a direct coupling or a feedback
mechanism exists between transcription and NER.
The notion that this important process constitutes a dis-

Cell
940

HTLlC
0.5 kb

EN
I I

BN
II

P
I

HTLl B

1

HTLlJ (0.W)

.
II

tinct subpathway of NER came from the finding that patients suffering from Cockayne’s syndrome (CS) carry specific defects in this system. CS is a rare genetic disorder
that manifests UV hypersensitivity (but no other cutaneous
abnormalities), retarded growth, and severe progressive
neurological degeneration. Remarkably, in striking contrast with XP, no significant increase in skin cancer is noted
(Lehmann, 1987; Nance and Berry, 1992). Cell fusion experiments have revealed the presence of at least two complementation groups, group A (CS-A) and group B (CS-B),
within the classical form of the disease (Tanaka et al.,
1981; Lehmann, 1982). A characteristic hallmark of the
disease is the observation that CS fibroblasts perform
ratesof repair synthesis in the normal range yet, in contrast
with repair-competent cells, are unable to recover their
RNA synthesis after UV irradiation (Mayne and Lehmann,
1982). The early suggestion put forward by Mayne and
Lehmann (1982) that the CS defect resides in the repair
of transcribed genes was only borne out by the recent
finding of Venema et al. (199Oa) that CS fibroblasts have
lost the preferential repair of active genes but are proficient
in overall genome repair. For CS-A, it was demonstrated
that the absence of preferential repair correlates with a
complete deficiency of selective repair of the transcribed
strand (Venema, 1991).
Here we report a key step toward defining this system
at the molecular level by the analysis of a gene implicated
in the preferential repair pathway. This human gene,
termed ERCCG, was cloned by virtue of its ability to correct
the NER defect of a UV-sensitive Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) mutant (Troelstra et al., 1990). The mutant, UV61,
is a representative of complementation group 6 of the
laboratory-generated, excision-deficient rodent cell lines
(Busch et al., 1989). We show that the ERCCG gene at the
same time corrects the repair defect of CS-B, the most
common form of the disease, and that the gene encodes
a protein with a presumed DNA unwinding function. The
helicase segment bears striking resemblance to similar
domains in transcription regulators and proteins involved
in various repair processes and chromosome stability recently identified in yeast and Drosophila.

PL14

I I

cDNA mn~,rucl

Figure 1. Construction
cDNA

of a Functional ERCCG

The inserts of HTLI Band HTLI C (human testis
cDNA library) were isolated from the phage
arms via PCR and joined by ligation (vertical
arrows) at the unique Bglll site (B). The fragment HTLI J(0.8E) is added through homologous recombination (X), and finally PL14 (human placenta cDNA library) is added to the
resulting molecule by ligation at the PflMl (P)
site. The parts obtained via PCR or homologous recombination
were checked by sequence analysis. The thick line in HTLlC corresponds to the probe used for Southern blot
analysis in Figure6B. Other symbols: E. EcoRI;
N, Nsil; dotted line, sequence not representing
ERCCG (artificially ligated to ERCCG); stippled
region, the ORF. See Experimental
Procedures for details.

Results
Isolation of the ERCCG cDNA
The human excision repair gene ERCCG was recently isolated, after large-scale transfection experiments of human
(HeLa) genomic DNA to UV-sensitive CHO mutant UV61
(rodent complementation group 6 [CC-S]) and rescue of
the correcting human sequences from a secondary transformant (Troelstra et al., 1990). The gene appeared to
have a respectable size (for transfection cloning) of close
to 100 kb. Unique conserved genomic E/XC6 sequences
were identified and used as probes to hybridize to a human
testis cDNA library. This resulted in the isolation of a number of overlapping cDNA clones, together having an insert
size of 3 kb with a polyadenylation signal 20 nt from the
3’ end. Northern blot analysis with part of this 3 kb cDNA
as a probe revealed the presence of two messenger RNAs
(mRNAs) of about 5 kb and 7-7.5 kb in length. Sequence
analysis and restriction mapping indicated that the difference in size is due to alternative polyadenylation (unpublished data). Both mRNAs are very lowly expressed, an
observation upheld by the recovery of very low numbers
of ERCCG cDNA clones from various cDNA libraries. After
screening of several cDNA libraries, an almost full-length
molecule of 4.7 kb could be constructed (see Figure 1 for
details).
Correction of UV61 by the ERCCG cDNA
The 4.7 kb cDNA molecule was inserted in mammalian
expression vector pSLM (see Experimental Procedures)
under the control of the SV40 late promoter. Cotransfection of this plasmid with pSV2neo to UV61 cells yielded
UV-resistant clones with very high efficiency (transfection
frequency of UV and G418 resistance was similar to that
of G418 resistance alone). UV survival of these transformants appeared within the wild-type range (Figure 2A).
To verify whether other DNA repair endpoints were corrected by ERCCG, we examined the recovery of RNA synthesis after UV exposure. In normal cells, transcription
drops rapidly after UV irradiation (owing to the appearance
of blocking lesions in the DNA template) but resumes

E;fCS Involved in CS and Preferential Repair

A

Figure 2. Correction of the UV61 Repair Defect by ERCC6 cDNA
(A) UV survival curves of wild-type CHO cell
line AA8 (closed boxes), mutant UV61 (closed
circles), and ERCCGcDNA transformant 61 E6a
(closed triangles).
(B) Recovery of RNA synthesis in wild-type cell
line AA6, mutant UV61, and ERCC6 cDNA
transformant 61 E6a. Cells unirradiated or UV
irradiated with 6 J/m* were pulse labeled with
PH]uridine at different times after irradiation;
the incorporated radioactivity was determined
by liquid scintillation counting (see Experimental Procedures for details on the procedure).
For symbols see (A). The standard error of the
mean (three duplicate plates) falls within the
size of the symbols.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

6

9

10

11

12

13

UVLdose (J/m’)

3

6

9

12

Hours after UVf (6J/m’)

within several hours as the result of preferential (strandspecific) repair. In excision-deficient
cells such as XP and
CS, recovery of RNA synthesis does not occur (Mayne and
Lehmann, 1962). Since this repair parameter has never
been investigated
for rodent mutants, we decided to assess the behavior of RNA synthesis in CHO wild-type AA6,
mutant UV61, and cDNA transformant
61 E6a upon UV
irradiation.
As shown in Figure 26, RNA synthesis (expressed as the ratio of [3H]uridine incorporation
in UVirradiated cells to that in unirradiated
cells) initially decreases within 1 hr to 700/o-80% but quickly resumes in
AA8, whereas it remains low in UV61. Recovery of RNA
synthesis,
as in wild type, is observed in ERCCG transformant 61 E6a, indicating that the human gene also corrects this repair endpoint.
To investigate the specificity of correction by ERCCG,
the gene was transfected
to mutants from rodent CG-4,
CG-5, and CG-7 and to two other members of group 6
(CG-1, CG-2, and CG-3 were not tested since the correct-

ing genes for these mutants have been cloned [van Duin
et al., 1986; Weber et al., 1990; Weeda et al., lQQOa,
1990b]). No UV-resistant transformants
were obtained in
the heterologous
CG, whereas numerous
UV-surviving
colonies were observed in the other representatives
of
CHO group 6, demonstrating
the specificity of ERCCG correction and validating the complementation
studies.

Nucleotide and Amino Acid Sequence
of ERCCG cDNA
The nucleotide sequence of the ERCCG cDNA is shown in
Figure 3A. The first ATG codon (nucleotide 80), preceded
by two in-frame stop codons, starts an open reading frame
(ORF) of 4479 bp. The purine often found at the important
-3 position before a start codon (Kozak, 1991) is present,
as is the G at +4. The other nucleotides within the start
site, however, deviate from the optimal initiation start site
GCC(A/G)CCATGG
(Kozak, 1991). All other ORFs present
encode much smaller polypeptides.
Therefore, we con-

Cell
942

Figure 3. Nucleotide
ERCCG cDNA

and Predicted

Amino

Acid Sequence

of the

(A) ERCCG nucleotide and predicted amino acid sequence. The sequence of 4714 nt has been obtained from the cDNA fragments, as
depicted in Figure 1, together with a cDNA clone from an adenovirustransformed retina cell library (the first 16 nt). Putative functional units
are overlined: CKII phos, casein kinase II phosphorylation site; NLS,
nuclear location signal (basic regions are double overlined); NTS, nucleotide binding fold; numbers I, IA, and II-VI referto thecorresponding
helicase motifs. The AATTAAA polyadenylation signal is underlined.
Arrows indicate the mutations in patient CSlAN; CSD means the cryptic splice donor, while putat. SA indicates the putative splice acceptor;
the putative branch point, the pyrimidine stretch, and the AG dinucleotides are underlined: the third AG represents the normal exon 13
border.
(8) Schematical representation of predicted functional domains in the
ERCCG protein. The truncated ERCCG proteins encoded by the
CSl AN alleles are indicated. A, acidic amino acid stretch: G, glycinerich region; S, serine phosphorylation site preceded by a nuclear location signal; N, nucleotide binding fold; arrow, nonsense sequence due
to a frameshift in allele b of patient CSlAN.

elude that the ORF of 4479 bp, depicted in Figure 3A,
defines the ERCCG protein.
The deduced amino acid sequence specifies a protein
of 1493 amino acids (see Figures 3A and 3B), with a predicted molecular size of 168 kd. Although a systematic

computer search did not identify any protein with overall
homology to ERCCG, a close inspection of the sequence
did reveal several regions of interest and similarity to other
polypeptides.
First, there was an acidic part from residue 356-394
harboring close to 60% glutamic or aspartic acids including a stretch of 10 acidic residues. Acidic regions have
been found in a number of nuclear proteins that associate
with chromatin or histones (Lapeyre et al., 1967; Ptashne,
1966; Sung et al., 1966; Wen et al., 1969). This part is
followed by a stretch of glycin residues (amino acids 442446) and a very hydrophilic segment (from residue 447495) containing >60% charged amino acids.
Second, two regions with the hallmarks of a bipartite
nuclear location signal (amino acids 466-461 and 10381055; Robbins et al., 1991) were found in close vicinity to
potential casein kinase II phosphorylation sites (Kemp and
Pearson, 1990, amino acids 483-490 and 1068-1074).
Recently, it was noticed that putative casein kinase II phosphorylation sites are located nearby many nuclear location
signal sequences (Rihs et al., 1991).
Third, the region from amino acid 527 to amino acid
950 contains seven sequences (starting with a nucleotide
binding fold) matching seven consecutive motifs recognized by several investigators to be conserved between
two superfamilies of RNA and DNA helicases (Gorbalenya
et al., 1989). This region (amino acids 527-1007) exhibits,
in addition, a very high overall homology with parts of eight
other proteins containing the same seven motifs: RAD16
(Bang et al., 1992; Schild et al., 1992) RAD54, SNF2

E/XC6
943

Involved in CS and Preferential

Repair

(SWl2), STHl (Laurent et al., 1992), MOT1 (Davis et al.,
1992) FUN30 (Clark et al., 1992), brm (Tamkun et al.,
1992) and lodestar (Girdham and Glover, 1991) (Figure
48). The similarity is confined to this particular segment
(Figure 4A) and is far higher than the motif-restricted homology normally detected between different helicases
(see Figure 48 for the consensus sequence of the seven
helicase motifs).
Fourth, a second putative nucleotide binding domain
(Saraste et al., 1990) is found in the C terminus (amino
acids 1134-l 138).
Involvement of ERCCG in CS
The ERCCG gene, correcting a CHO mutant, could possibly also be implicated in one of the forms of XP or CS. The
first clue concerning this possibility was presented by a
patient with symptoms of late onset CS, being heterozygous for an interstitial lOq211 deletion in all cells (Fryns
et al., 1991), i.e., a chromosomal region to which we have
assigned ERCC6 (Troelstra et al., 1992). Southern blot
analysis of DNA from the patient suggested that ERCCG
resides within the deleted segment (data not shown).
Since no cells of this patient were available and the complementation group to which he belonged was unknown,
we decided to transfect the ERCCG cDNA expression plasmid together with the dominant selectable marker
pSV2neo into CSSBE.SS.Gl and CSlAN.S3.G2, immortalized cell lines representing CS CG-A and CG-B, respectively (Mayne et al., 1986). G418-resistant transformants
of each cell line were grown in mass culture. In view of the
poor transfectability of many SV40-immortalized human
fibroblasts, Southern blot analysis was performed to verify
whether a significant fraction of the G418-resistant transformants had indeed incorporated the cotransfected
ERCCG cDNA. For CS3BE.S3.GlI this fraction wasvery low,
but detectable, on Southern blot (average incorporation of
<O.l intact ERCCG cDNA copy per cell). CSlAN.S3.G2
cells had an average integration of one to two copies per
transformant (data not shown). To test whether ERCCG
restores the DNA repair capacity of one of the CS complementation groups, the G418-resistant mass populations
(consisting of f 100 and 800-l 000 independent clones
for CG-A and CG-B, respectively) were subjected to a UV
dose lethal to the parental CS cells (8 or 6 J/m*, which
gives a 0.25% survival for CS-A and CS-B, respectively,
and 15% or 25% survival for wild-type cells; the treatment
was repeated after 48 hr). For CS3BE.S3.Gl, none of the
G418-resistant cells survived the UV selection, and neither
did the transfected mass population show enhanced survival (at different doses). This suggests that ERCCG is unable to correct the repair defect of CS-A (although it should
be kept in mind that less than 10% of the transformants
had incorporated an intact copy of the f/KC6 cDNA).
fRCC6 did confer UV resistance to CSlANS3.G2
cells;
the transfected mass population efficiently survived the
UV selection. The UV survival of two independent transformants (EGlANa and E61 ANd) is depicted in Figure 5A
and shows that both have regained a wild-type UV resistance. To establish the specificity of correction further,
ERCCG cDNA was introduced (either by DNA transfection

or by microinjection) into representative cell lines of XP-C
and XP-E to XP-G; the correcting genes for XP-A (Tanaka
et al., 1990), XP-B (Weedaet al., 1990b), and XP-D (Flejter
et al., 1992) have already been isolated and are different
from ERCCG. Because XP-E cells are only slightly UV sensitive, it was not possible to derive definite conclusions
from the transfection experiments to this complementation
group. The ERCC6 gene was unable to correct the repair
defect of the other XP groups tested. These results confirm
the complementation data and demonstrate that no overlap exists between CS-B and any of the known XP groups
(with the possible exception of XP-E), in contrast with
CS-C, which is identical to XP-B.
RNA Synthesis Recovery in E/WC6 cDNA
Transformants of CSlANS3.GP
As mentioned above, CS cells are, in contrast with repairproficient human cells, unable to recover their RNA synthesis after UV exposure (Mayne and Lehmann, 1982).
To see whether ERCC6 also complements this CS-typical
repair parameter, RNA synthesis was measured after
UV irradiation in SV40-transformed normal fibroblasts,
CSlAN.S3.G2, and cDNA transformants E61ANa and
EGlANd. As shown in Figure 58, transcription initially
drops to -60% within 1 hr after irradiation. The RNA synthesis quickly recovers in normal cells, whereas it remains
repressed in CSlAN.SS.G2 cells. The cDNA transformant
E61ANd resumes transcription with almost wild-type kinetics; E61ANa, on the other hand, recovers more slowly,
being retarded at early times after UV but reaching wildtype levels at 16 hr. In Figure 5C the level of transcription
16 hr after UV irradiation is tested at different UVfluences.
In both cDNA transformants, RNA synthesis is similar to
that in repair-proficient cells for all UV doses, whereas
transcription in CSlAN.S3.GP is consistently lower. The
slow (but after 16 hr complete) recovery of E61ANa, in
contrast with the fast recovery of E61ANd (Figure 5B),
might be attributed to the slow growth rate of EGlANa.
Alternatively, expression levels of the cDNA, influenced
by, e.g., the integration site, could have an effect on the
kinetics.
To demonstrate the universality of CS-B correction, primary fibroblasts of another CS-B patient, CSlBE, were
microinjected with ERCCG. Recovery of UV-induced transcription inhibition was, as in the CSlAN cDNA transformants, restored to levels within wild-type range (data
not shown). Preliminary data suggesting that microinjection of ERCCG into primary fibroblasts of CS-A did not restore RNA synthesis recovery after UV irradiation confirm
the complementation data.
The ERCCG Mutation in CSlAN Cells
The previous experiments showed that ERCCG specifically
corrects the UV survival and RNA synthesis recovery after
UV exposure of CS-B. To obtain direct proof that ERCCG
is responsible for the CS-B repair defect, we searched
for mutations in the gene. The polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) was used to amplify ERCC6 cDNA selectively from
RNA of the SV40-transformed CS-B cell line CSlAN.S3.G2. For both cDNA synthesis and PCR, the ERCCG

‘h&case’ domains

A
SNF2

j--L

Figure 4. Homology of the ERCCG Helicase Regton to the Similar Region
of RAD54, RAD16, lodestar, SNFP, STHI, brm, MOTl, and FUN30
(A) Schematical representation
of ERCCG, RAD54, RAD16, lodestar, and
SNF2 to indicate the location of the homologous segment in the proteins
Stippled boxes represent homology; helicase motifs are indicated by closed
boxes.
(6) Alignment of conserved regions of the ERCCG, RAD54. RAD16, lodestar,
SNFZ, STHl, brm, MOTl, and FUN30 amino acid sequences. Sequences
that correspond to the seven consensus motifs identified among two superfamilies of DNA and RNA helicases are overlined. The consensus (consens)
sequences given below the corresponding
domains are from Gorbalenya et
al. (1969); hydrophobic (I, L, V, M, F, Y, W) and charged or polar residues
(S, T, D, E, N, 0, K, R) are indicated by plus and 0, respectively. Shaded
amino acids are similar in at least five of the proteins compared; residues
belonging to one of the following groups are considered to be similar: L, V,
I, M; F, Y, W; S, T, A, P, G; K, R, H; and E, D, Q, N. The RAD54 sequence
is taken from Emery et al. (1991) and the SNF2 sequence from Laurent et
al. (1991); other references are given in the text. A small change has been
introduced in the published sequence of the lodestar gene (Girdham and
Glover, 1991) since we noticed that this results in the presence of all seven
helicase domains, instead of the reported three. By introducing a loop of 61
amino acids between domains Ill and IV in the FUN30 amino acid sequence,
we were able to perfectly align domains I-III, in addition to domains IV-VI
that were identified by Clark et al. (1992).

EX6

Involved in CS and Preferential

Repair

Figure 5. Correction of the CSlAN.S3.G2
pair Defect by ERCCG cDNA

A

Re-

(A) UV survival curves of an SV40-transformed
wild-type cetl line (solid line), mutant CSlAN.S3.G2 (dashed and dotted line), and ERCCG
cDNA transformants
EGlANa (dashed line)
and lEGlANd (dotted line).
(B) Recovery of RNA synthesis at different
times after UV irradiation. Cells unirradiated or
UV irradiated with 4 J/m2 were pulse labeled
with PH]uridine at different times after irradiation; the incorporated radioactivity was determined by liquid scintillation counting. For symbols see (A); the average (open circle) and the
standard error of the mean (vertical line) are
given (within one experiment).
(C) RNA synthesis 16 hr after UV irradiation
with increasing dose. Cells unirradiated or UV
irradiated with different dose were pulse labeled with PHjuridine 16 hr after irradiation; the
incorporated radioactivity was determined by
liquid scintillation counting. For symbols see
(A) and (B).

0.1
1

3

2

""4

6

7

dos4e (J/M5')

B

ii

1.2

Hours after UVf (4J/m2)

C

UV!-dose (J/m2)

IS

Cdl
946

GATC

GATC

,,,

,,,

GATC

UI A/T
: 1KI”,
am8

---bit1Q ,

HeLa

C.SlAN(SV)

-

”

CSlAN

5’

B

10.5 kb

E/KC-6

4.4 kb

control

Figure 6. ERCCG Mutation in CSlANS3.GZ

probe

probe

(EFD75)

and Allele a of Patient CSl AN

(A) Part of the ERCCG nucleotide sequence of total PCR product (from cDNA) from HeLa, CSlAN.SB.G2 (CSlAN(SV)), and the primary fibroblasts
of patient CSIAN. The A to T transversion, resulting in a premature stop codon (the mutation in allele a), is indicated by an arrowhead.
(B) Southern blot analysis of CSlAN.SB.G2 and two control cell lines. The same Southern blot was hybridized with two probes. The ERCC6 probe
is a 350 bp EcoRl cDNA fragment (see Figure l), and EFD75 is a control probe derived from the telomeric end of chromosome IOq (lOq26) (Simpson
and Cann, 1990). The control probe recognizestwo polymorphic bands in DNAof CSlAN.S3.G2, each having an intensity half of that from the single
band of both controls. This indicates that at least this telomeric part of chromosome 10 is diploid in CSlANS3.G2.
For the two controls, the ERCC6
signal is comparable with that of EFD75. In CSlAN.SB.G2,
however, the intensity of the ERCC6 signal is similar to that of only one of the two
polymorphic EFD75 bands, suggesting that only one copy of ERCCG is present.

mRNA was divided into six overlapping segments of approximately 1 kb each. Single-stranded DNA for direct sequence analysis of the PCR product was prepared by
asymmetric PCR, using amplified cDNA as a template.
Sequencing revealed an A to T transversion at nucleotide
1088, resulting in a premature stop at amino acid position
337 (Figure 8A). Only one type of allele was detected, both
at the level of RNA and in genomic DNA, implying that
CSlAN.SS.G2 is either homozygous or hemizygous for
the A’o88to T transversion. In the family history of patient
CSlAN, consanguinity has not been reported. Southern
blot analysis of DNA from CSl ANS3.G2 confirmed that at
least part of one ERCCG allele was deleted (Figure 8B).
Since SV40-transformed fibroblasts are chromosomally
unstable, sequence analysis of the fRCC6 gene and
cDNA was verified in the primary fibroblasts of patient
CSl AN, GMO0739. The A to T transversion at nucleotide
1088 was confirmed, but unexpectedly the primary line
appeared to possess a second allele with the wild-type A
residue at nucleotide position 1088 (Figure 6A). Further

sequence analysis of the total PCR product derived from
RNA of GM00739 revealed the appearance of a double
sequence ladder when entering from exon 14 backward
into exon 13 (Figure 7A). When the normal nucleotide sequence of exon 13 is subtracted, a perfect match is found
with asequence 100 bp upstream in exon 13. The resulting
100 bp deletion is not present in RNA from the SV40transformed CSlAN.S3.G2 cell line (Figure 7A), thus proving that it is derived from the second allele (allele b) of
GM00739. The S’end of the deletion coincides exactly with
the end of exon 13, whereas the 5’ end occurs in a
sequence (GGIEACT; see Figure 3A, nucleotides 2576
2582) matching the splice donor consensus (AG/GJPuAG;
Pu = A or G) (Senapathy et al., 1990). This suggests that,
in allele b, a cryptic donor is utilized instead of the normal
exon 13 splice donor. Therefore, a mutation in the splice
donor of exon 13 of allele b was expected. At the level of
DNA, however, neither the normal nor the cryptic splice
donor was mutated (Figure 78). The only detectable mutation was a Czw to T transition 30 nt upstream of the normal

ERCCG Involved in CS and Preferential
947

Repair

GATC

GATC

GATC

GATC
------2
..
introll 13

T
z -

exon 13

z!%_, -

SD allele a / WI
SA allele b

-.. _
-3

Pi
G

r

A
(PYI2

CSl AN(SV)

axon 13 wl I CSI AN allele a

axon 14

1
\

CSl AN allele b

AG
(PYI7

CSlAN

I

I

ur

1

FYI2
G
FYI2
A
T

\

PY
A
Pu putative
T
py branch
N
point
PY

1

A

Possibility 1

I

Possibility 2

5’

CSlAN

C
Figure 7. ERCCG Mutation in Allele b of Patient CSIAN
(A) ERCCB nucleotide sequence from the exon 14lexon 13 border of both CSlAN.SB.G2 (CSl AN(W)) and the primary fibroblasts CSl AN. Sequence
analysis was performed on total PCR product obtained after amplification of RNA. The start of the double sequence ladder in CSlAN, resulting
from a deletion of 100 bp (allele b, schematically depicted underneath the sequences), is indicated by an arrowhead. The sequence obtained with
CSlANS3.GP
is identical to that using HeLa RNA.
(B) Nucleotide sequence of part of exon 13 at the level of the genome of CSlAN.W.GL
(CSlAN(SV)) and the primary fibroblasts CSlAN. The C
to T transition in CSIAN, responsible for the 100 nt deletion at the mRNA level, is indicated by an arrowhead. The asterisk next to the CSl AN
sequence indicates a sequence artifact that was also detected in CSlAN(SV) (and HeLa) on longer exposures.
(C) Schematical representation of the two possible splicing reactions that could result in the 100 nt deletion in the mRNA of CSIAN.

splice donor of exon 13. How could a single point mutation
at this position have such a profound influence on the
apparent functioning of the still normal splice donor sequence 30 nt downstream? A search for dramatic changes
in secondary structure caused by the C to T transition
failed to reveal any clues to explain this effect. Close inspection of the sequence revealed that the C to T transition
might create a putative branch point sequence (Ruskin et
al., 1984; Senapathy et al., 1990) at position 2845-2851,
which, together with a coincidently present pyrimidine
stretch and one of the three subsequent AG dinucleotides,
completes a possible splice acceptor site (see Figures 3A
and 78). This newly created acceptor, together with the
cryptic splice donor in exon 13, may generate a new intron.
The 100 nt deletion could thus be the result of an extra
splice event if the third (C)AG is used. The normal splice
donor site of exon 13 should then have a dual role: splice

donor in the normal splicing of intron 13 and splice acceptor in a subsequent erroneous splice event, removing
the last 100 nt of exon 13 (see Possibility 1 in Figure 7C).
Alternatively, use of the first AG dinucleotide, which in in
vitro and in vivo studies is demonstrated to be strongly
preferred aboveanysecond AG (Smith et al., 1989; Weeda
et al., 1990a), would define a very small exon of 9 nt at
the end of exon 13. It is known from studies of several
investigators that such small exons may be skipped (both
in vitro and in vivo) when the surrounding splice sites are
nonoptimal (Black, 1991; Dominski and Kole, 1991,1992).
This would result in the ligation of the cryptic splice donor
within exon 13 to exon 14 (see Possibility 2 in Figure 7C).
For the ERCCG gene product, the resulting 100 nt deletion
has profound consequences. The protein will only be 857
amino acids long and consequently lacks half of the helicase region (see Figure 38). Presumably, as with allele a,

Cdl
948

Table 1. Comparison

of Repair Characteristics

of UV81 and CS Cells

Repair Characteristics

UV81”

cs

UV sensitivity (at Dlo)
RNA synthesis recovery
after UV
Repair synthesis (percentage of wild type)
Preferential repair of CPDs
in active genes
Overall genome repair
Repair of (8-4) photoproducts
UV-induced mutagenesis

=2.7x b
3

=3-3.5x
-e

=70%’

Wild-type ranges

37%”

-’

-bl
+b

+Q
+k

Elevatedb

Elevated”

c

B Mutant, probably leaky (Troelstra et al., 1990).
b Thompson et al. (1988a).
c CSlAN.SS.G2 (unpublished data).
d This study.
B Mayne and Lehmann (1982).
’ Unpublished data.
g Andrews et al. (1978).
h Lommel and Hanawalt (1991).
1Venema et al. (1990a).
1 Characteristic of rodent cells.
k Barrett et al. (1991).
’ Henderson and Long (1981).
m Arlett and Harcourt (1982).

allele b in CSlAN
ERCCG protein.

cells will produce a nonfunctional

Discussion
A Rodent Equivalent of CS-B
The ERCC6 gene was previously isolated by virtue of its
ability to correct the repair deficiency of UV61, a NERdeficient rodent mutant cell line from complementation
group 6 (Troelstra et al., 1990). In this paper, we report
the isolation of a functional ERCCG cDNA molecule that
efficiently and specifically corrects both the UV sensitivity
of UV61 (and other representatives of rodent group 6) and
its inability to restore RNA synthesis after UV exposure.
Introduction of this cDNA into cells of several XP, CS, and
rodent complementation groups by transfection or microneedle injection demonstrates a specific correction of the
repair deficiency of CS-6 fibroblasts: both UV survival as
well as RNA synthesis recovery are restored to a level
within wild-type range. This result implies UV61 and other
members of rodent complementation group 6 (Thompson
et al., 1988b; Busch et al., 1989) to be the rodent equivalents of the human repair disorder CS-B, the most common
form of the disease. In retrospect we note that the repair
phenotypes of UV61 and CS-B can be reconciled with
each other (Table l), taking into account the fact that rodent and human excision repair display some principal
differences (Zelle et al., 1980; van Zeeland et al., 1981;
Mellon et al., 1987) and the notion that UV61 is very likely
a leaky mutant (Troelstra et al., 1990).
The ERCCG Mutations in Patient CSlAN
Sequence analysis of the ERCCG gene in patient CSl AN
revealed deleterious mutations in both alleles. Allele a,

which is the only allele present in CSlAN.S3.G2 cells (see
below), carries an A 1o88to T transversion leading to a premature stop at amino acid 337. The encoded protein of
336 amino acids lacks all postulated domains (Figure 38).
Allele b contains a Czm to T transition that triggers an
erroneous splice event and thereby results in a frameshift.
As depicted in Figure 7C, two splice mechanisms can be
envisaged that could give rise to the deletion of 100 bp.
Although undetected in CSl AN mRNA, we cannot exclude
the presence of trace amounts of the partially spliced intermediate depicted in Figure 7C (Possibility 1). Similarly,
undetectable amounts of mRNA including the newly defined 9 nt exon (depicted in Figure 7C, Possibility 2) might
be produced. However, none of these transcripts will encode a protein longer then 860 amino acids. Presumably,
these severely truncated ERCCG proteins will be nonfunctional. Nevertheless, cells from patient CSlAN seem to
be affected in preferential DNA repair only, implying that
ERCCG is specific for this NER subpathway. In addition,
these findings suggest ERCCG to be a nonvital protein, in
contrast with the ERCC2 and ERCC3 gene products, of
which at least the yeast homologs RAD3 and ERCC3Sc
(SSL2) are shown to be indispensable for cell survival (Higgins et al., 1983; Naumovski and Friedberg, 1983; Gulyas
and Donahue, 1992; J. H. J. H., S. Prakash, and L. Prakash, unpublished data).
The immortalized CSl AN derivative CSlAN.SS.G2 only
retained allele a and lacked allele b. Presumably, this is
not due to loss of one total copy of chromosome 10, since
CSlAN.SB.G2 is polymorphic for at least one locus on
lOq26 (EFD75; see Figure 8B). A similar case was reported recently with another repair disorder resulting from
mutations in the ligase I gene. The primary fibroblasts of
the patient, designated 46BR, carried different mutations
in each ligase I gene copy, whereas the SV40-transformed
derivative 46BR.lGl only retained one of the two (mutated) alleles (Barnes et al., 1992). Although the genomic
instability of SV40-transformed cell lines is generally
known, these findings further emphasize the importance
of including primary cell lines as controls in this type of
study.

ERCCG, Member of a Recently Identified Family
of Putative Helicases
The predicted amino acid sequence suggests the ERCCG
gene product to be a nuclear DNA (or RNA) unwinding
protein. ERCCP and ERCC3 have also been postulated to
encode DNA helicases, as deduced from their amino acid
sequence (Weber et al., 1990; Weeda et al., 1990b), and
for ERCC2, in addition, based on the demonstrated DNA
helicase activity of its yeast homolog RAD3 (Sung et al.,
1987). Therefore, the fRCC6 gene may encode the third
DNA unwinding function in mammalian NER. In E. coli
both the UvrAnB complex and the UvrD protein have been
shown to exhibit DNA unwinding activity (Oh and Grossman, 1987; Orren et al., 1992, and references therein).
Similarly, several DNA helicases might be expected to
function in mammalian excision repair. The gene product
of ERCCG, however, certainly differs from the E. coli

;f$CS

Involved in CS and Preferential

Repair

UvrA*B and UvrD proteins in that it is specific for preferential repair of active genes.
The entire helicase region of the ERCCG protein appears
to be highly homologous to a similar region in proteins
from a recently identified, rapidly expanding family of postulated helicases (Bang et al., 1992; Clark et al., 1992;
Davis et al., 1992; Johnson et al., 1992; Laurent et al.,
1992; Schild et al., 1992; Tamkun et al., 1992). This novel
subgroup encompasses proteins implicated in transcription regulation (SNF2, MOTl, and brm), preservation of
chromosome stability (lodestar), and DNA repair (RAD16,
RAD54, and the very recently identified RADS protein).
The group also includes two proteins of unknown function
(STHl and FUN30). The degree of homology (around 30%
identity and up to 57% similarity) by far exceeds the resemblance normally present among helicases. This suggests
a specific type of helicase function common to all members
of this gene family.
The transcription regulators SNF2 (Laurent et al., 1991)
and brm (Tamkun et al., 1992) are thought to be engaged in
transcription activation, SNF2 as a component of a larger
functional complex involving SWIl, SWl3, SNF5, and
SNF6 (Laurent et al., 1991; Peterson and Herskowitz,
1992). The gene product MOTl, on the other hand, is
supposed to be a negative regulator of transcription (Davis
et al., 1992). One of the proposed activities for the MOT1
protein is that it strips resident DNA-binding proteins
(which would otherwise activate transcription) from their
cognate binding sites by melting the DNA helix (Davis et
al., 1992).
Mutations in the maternal-effect gene lodestar result in
chromatin bridges at anaphase. The precise molecular
pathway in which this protein functions is unknown, but
one of the processes suggested is completion of incomplete DNA repair or replication prior to mitosis (Girdham
and Glover, 1991).
It is of interest to note that the three major DNA repair
pathways in yeast are all equipped with at least one member of this subfamily: RAD16 in NER of the inactive HMLa
locus, i.e., opposite from the function of ERCCG (Terleth
et al., 1990); RAD54 in recombination repair (Saeki et al.,
1961; Budd and Mortimer, 1962); and RAD5 in postreplication repair (Johnson et al., 1992). Our results demonstrate
that preferential repair of active genes also involves a
member of this helicase subfamily (ERCCG). Common denominators of all proteins comprising this gene family
could be complex formation (as described for SNF2
[Laurent et al., 1991; Peterson and Herskowitz, 1992]),
complex delivery at the desired site in DNA, and release
of DNA-bound proteins (as proposed for MOT1 [Davis et
al., 1992]), although other options can be envisaged as
well.
Hypothetical Models for ERCCG Function
The predicted amino acid sequence of ERCCG advocates
the protein to be a nuclear DNA helicase, with strong sequence homology to the subfamily described above. The
ability of the E/XC6 cDNA to correct the repair defect of
CS-B fibroblasts and the severe mutations in CSl AN cells
provides evidence for a specific role of ERCCG in preferen-

tial repair of active genes. Preferential repair has been
documented in mammals (Bohr et al., 1965; Mellon et al.,
1966, 1967), yeast (Terleth et al., 1969; Smerdon and
Thoma, 1990), and E. coli (Mellon and Hanawalt, 1969).
The molecular mechanism of the process itself is, nevertheless, completely unknown. A major step toward defining this NER subpathwayin E. coli is the recent purification
of the transcription repair coupling factor (TRCF) (Selby
and Sancar, 1991). This polypeptide, identified as the mfd
gene product (Selby et al., 1991), specifically enhances
repair of the template strand of an actively transcribed
gene in an in vitro repair system. It is speculated that the
protein recognizes a RNA polymerase complex that is
stalled at a DNA lesion and forms together with this complex a high affinity binding site for other repair proteins
(the UvrABC complex) (Selbyet al., 1991). With respect to
the biochemical reaction that the ERCCG protein might
catalyze within the mammalian preferential repair process, we can envisage several models. First, a transcription complex stalled at a lesion will probably sterically hinder access to the damage by the NER machinery and
should somehow be displaced. A possibility would be that
the presumed helicase activity of ERCCG serves to dissociate the RNA polymerase complex from the DNA, e.g., by
locally melting the nascent RNA-DNA hybrid region, or
that the protein forces the polymerase complex either past
the injury or backward (see MOT1 [Davis et al., 1992)).
Extrapolating from this idea, it may be that an important
function of this subfamily of putative helicases is to strip
bound proteins from specific DNA regions either in the
context of repair or in transcription regulation. Dissociation
of protein complexes from nucleic acids by helicases has
already been suggested in the process of splicing (Ruby
and Abelson, 1991). Second, or in addition, the ERCCG
helicase could, as part of a repair complex, be involved in
scanning the transcribed strand of active genes for a
stalled RNA polymerase, thus efficiently guiding the NER
machinery to lesions that thwart transcription (see TRCF
[Selby et al., 19911). Which of the presented orother possible hypotheses concerning ERCCG function corresponds
to the actual role of the protein in the preferential repair
subpathway remains to be elucidated.
Experimental Procedures
General Procedures
Purification of nucleic acids, restriction enzyme digests, gel electrophoresis, DNA ligation, synthesis of radiolabeled probes using random
oligonucleotide primers, and filter hybridization were performed according to established procedures (Sambrook et al., 1989).
Isolation of cDNA Clones and Sequence Analysis
Unique genomic fragments were used as a probe to hybridize a lgtl 1
human testis cDNA library (Clonetech). cDNA fragments isolated were
subsequently used as probes to screen cDNA libraries from human
testis, placenta (Ye et al., 1997), brain (cortex), amygdala, ovary
(Clonetech), adenovirus-transformed
retina cells, or pre-B cell line
Nalm-6 (provided by Dr. A. Bernard@, and a cDNA library provided by
Dr. Ii. Okayama. Sequence analysis was performed on denatured
double-stranded
plasmid by the dideoxy chain termination method
(Sanger et al., 1977) using T7 DNA polymerase (Pharmacia). Se
quences were determined on both strands either by construction of
plasmids containing progressive unidirectional
deletions with the
Erase-a-Base System (Promega) or by sequence-specific
primers. Se-

Cell
950

quences have been compared with the protein and nucleotide
bases using TFASTA and BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990).

data

Plasmids
Construction of the cDNA expression plasmid was done as follows (see
Figure 1): HTLI B and HTLI C (nucleotides 1462-3746 and f 27004714), containing several internal EcoRl sites, were isolated from the
)L vector (cloning site EcoRI) via PCR and joined at the unique Bglll
site (nucleotide 2991). The 3.2 kb cDNA thus obtained was cloned into
the Sall site of pTZl9R containing a more 5’but overlapping fragment
(HTLI J(0.6E)) of 700 bp, with 205 bp overlap in the following orientation: EcoRI-700 bp fragment 5’to 3’-EcoRI-Sail).
Transformation into
E. coli strain DH5aF’ resulted in a plasmid that had recombined the
two ERCCG fragments somewhere in the 205 bp overlapping region.
The ERCCB sequence of this plasmid was verified, and one mistake
originating from the PCR was removed by exchanging the Nsil fragment containing the error with the original Nsil fragment. The total ORF
was then obtained by ligation of the most 5’ fragment to the PflMl
site at position 1361. This almost full-length cDNA molecule was then
ligated into a modified pSVL eukaryotic expression vector (Pharmacia;
M. van Duin, unpublished data), yielding pSLMEG(+).
Cell Lines, Transfectlon
Experiments,
UV Selection,
and UV Survival
The CHO cell lines used were wild-type AA6, mutants UV41, UV135,
UV61, and VBI 1 from CG-4, CG-5, CG-6, and CG-7, respectively
(Zdzienicka et al., 1988; Busch et al., 1989). and two new and unpublished mutants from group 6 provided by Dr. D. Busch. The immortalized human fibroblasts are SV40-A’dam (wild type), CW12 (XP-C from
XP7CA), CW3 (XP-E from XPPRO) (Wood et al., 1987) XPPYOSV
(XP-F) (Yagi and Takebe, 1983). CS3BES3.Gl
(CS-A) (Mayne et al.,
1986) and CSlAN.SS.GZ (CS-B) (Mayne et al., 1986). Primary fibroblasts used are XPl BI (XP-G) (Keijzer et al., 1979) CS3BE (CS-A),
CSIAN (CS-B), and CSlBE (CS-B) (Lehmann, 1982). All CHO cells
and immortalized human fibroblasts used were grown in 1 :l FlODulbecco’s minimal essential medium supplemented with antibiotics
and 8%-10% fetal calf serum (FIO-DMEM). Primary fibroblasts were
cultured in FlO supplemented with antibiotics and IO%-15% fetal calf
serum. Transformed cells harboring the E. coli neo dominant marker
gene (plasmid pSV2neo) were selected and cultured in medium containing G418 (concentration 300-850 nglml, depending on the cell
line).
Transfection of CHO cells and immortalized fibroblasts was performed using lipofectin (Bethesda Research Laboratories), essentially
as described by the manufacturer. All cells were transfected at approximately 80% confluence (on 80 m m petri dishes), with 2 trg of pSV2neo
and 5 pg of pSLMEG(+). DNA (a total of 7 pg) and 14 ng of lipofectin
were separately added to Opti-MEM (Bethesda Research Laboratories); thereafter, the two were mixed and left at rcnom temperature
for 15 min. Cells were washed with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS)
before addition of the Opti-MEM-DNA-lipofectin
mixture. CHO cells
were incubated for 6-7 hr; thereafter 10% fetal calf serum was added.
Medium was refreshed with FlO-DMEM after approximately 16 hr.
Immortalized human fibroblasts were incubated for a similar period,
but medium was subsequently refreshed with FlO-DMEM
Cells were
trypsinized (and, depending on cell density, divided over more dishes)
and placed on selection medium 48 hr after transfection. Selection for
repair-proficient
transformants was started after the appearance of
G418-resistant colonies, Cells were trypsinized, and UV selection was
started 16-20 hr after trypsinization for CHO cells, 20-48 hr after trypsinization for immortalized human fibroblasts, cells were irradiated
three times, CHO cells at 1 day intervals and the SV4C-immortalized
fibroblasts at 2 day intervals. The UV dose given (Philips TUV low
pressure mercury tube, 15 W, 0.46 J/m’/s; predominantly 254 nm)
varied with the cell line: 2 J/m2 (UV135); 4 J/m2 (UV41, XPPYOSV); 6
J/m2(CW12, CSlANS3,GZ);
8 J/m2(CS3BE.S3.Gl);
8.4 J/m2(UV61);
and 11 J/m2 (VBl 1).
For determination of UV sensitivity of G41 Eresistant mass populations
(CSSBES3.Gl
and CSlANS3.GP transformants), G41Sresistant plus
UV-resistant mass populations (61E6a), or isolated UV-resistant cofonies
(E61 ANa and EGlANd), cells were plated at densities varying from 2 x
101 to 5 x 105 cells per 60 m m petri dish, depending on cell line and UV
dose. Cells were rinsed with PBS and exposed to UV light about 1 day

after plating. A series of dishes was irradiated for each cell line, each
receiving a single UV dose (three dishes per UV dose). Clones were fixed
and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue 6-10 days after UV irradiation,
and relative cloning efficiencies were determined.
RNA Synthesis Recovery
The method used was as described by Mayne and Lehmann (1982)
with several modifications. Cells were seeded in 30 m m petri dishes
in 1.5 ml of medium. One day after seeding, the medium was changed
for FlO, supplemented with antibiotics, 15% fetal calf serum, 20 m M
HEPES, and 0.025 t&i/ml [‘Cjthymidine
(50 mCi/mmol). The cells
were grown for 16 hr, and then the medium was removed; cells were
rinsed with PBS and UV irradiated (at 254 nm, ffuence rate 0.7 Jlm*/s,
three petri dishes for each time point or UV dose). At various times
after UV irradiation, the medium was replaced by medium containing
8 t&i/ml PH]uridine (45 Ci/mmol), and the cells were incubated for 1
hr. At the end of the labeling period, cells were washed once with
ice-cold PBS containing >I m M uridine and once with ice-cold PBS.
Cells were scraped from the dishes and spotted onto GFlC Whatman
glass filters soaked in 10% trichloroacetic
acid. These were then
washed once in 10% trichloroacetic acid and 96% ethanol, dried, and
counted in a liquid scintillation counter. ‘C counts served as an internal
control for the number of cells present.
Microinjection
ERCCG construct pSLMEG(+) was injected into nuclei of XP or CS
homopolykaryons
as described by van Duin et al. (1989). Cells were
incubated 24-48 hr to allow expression of the injected DNA. To determine the influence of the ERCCG gene on DNA repair, injected XP cells
were subjected to UV-induced repair synthesis (unscheduled DNA
synthesis), which was measured byautoradiographyas
described previously (Vermeulen et al., 1986). Injected CS fibroblasts were UV irradiated and subsequently incubated with PHjuridine to measure recovery
from UV-induced RNA synthesis inhibition.
DNA Amplification
and Mutation Determination
Total RNA (10 ng) was used for preparation of cDNA with ERCCS
specific primers. RNA was dissolved in 5 nl of water, heated for 3 min
at 85OC, and cooled on ice. Subsequently, the RNA was added to 15
ul containing 50 pmol of 3’primer, 18 U of RNAguard (Boehringer), 12.5
U of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase (Boehringer), 1
m M dNTPs, 50 m M KCI, 20 m M Tris HCI (pH 8.4 at 20°C), 2.5 m M
MgCI,, and 100 &!/ml bovine serum albumin; incubation was for 1 hr
at 37OC. The cDNA (4 ul of the above reaction mixture) was added to
96 pl containing 10 pmol of 5’primer, 0.2 m M dNTPs, 50 m M KCI, 20
m M Tris HCI (pH 8.4 at 20°C), 2.5 m M MgC&, 100 &ml BSA, and 2.5
U of Taq polymerase (Bethesda Research Laboratories); the mixture
was overlayed with oil. In some experiments, Taq polymerase was
added only after the samples reached the denaturing temperature of
94OC (hot start). Amplification was done in 35 cycles: 1 (or 2) cycles
of 5 min denaturation at 94°C 5 min annealing (temperature depending on primer combination used), and 5 min extension at 72OC,
followed by 34 (or 33) cycles of 2 min at 94OC, 2 min annealing, and
3 min at 72OC. Chromosomal DNA was amplified as above, starting
from 200 ng, in 25 cycles. Asymmetric PCR was performed on 1 ul of
PCR product, using the conditions mentioned above (35 cycles), with
a primer ratioof 1:100(05pmolofoneand50pmolof
theotherprimer).
If available, internal primers were used. Products were extracted once
with phenol-chloroform-isoamylalcohol
and once with chloroform,
separated from oligonucleotides and dNTPs on a Centriconcolumn (Amicon), and dried under vacuum in a SpeedVac concentrator
(New Brunswick Scientific). Pellets were dissolved in 15 nl, 7 ul of
which was used for each sequencing reaction.
Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to Dr. A. Bernards and Dr. H. Okayama for providing us with cDNA libraries, to Dr. D. Busch for two new and unpublished
group 6 mutants, and to Dr. A. R. Lehmann and Dr. L. V. Mayne for
some of the CS lines. We thank Dr. D. Schild for sharing with us
unpublished information. Furthermore, we greatly acknowledge the
help of G. Moolhuizen in the construction of the cDNA expression
plasmid and the assistance of Dr. N. G. J. Jaspers in RNA synthesis

;;,CCS

Involved in CS and Preferential

Repair

recovery experiments. We thank S. van Baa1 for his assistance in
computer work, P. van der Spek for the valuable use of his computer
program that pointed out the presence of the helicase domains, and M
Kuit for photography. This research was supported in part by Euratom
(contract number BJ6-141-NL).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by
the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby
marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC Section 1734
solely to indicate this fact.
Received July 20, 1992; revised September

25, 1992.

References
Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W., and Lipman, D. J.
(1990). Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403-410.
Andrews, A. D., Barrett, S. F., Yoder, F. W., and Robbins, J. H. (1978).
Cockayne’s syndrome fibroblasts have increased sensitivity to ultraviolet light but normal rates of unscheduled DNA synthesis. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 70, 237-239.
Arlett, C. F., and Harcourt, S. A. (1982). Variation in response to mutagens amongst normal and repair-defective human cells. In Molecular
Mechanisms and Their Implications for Environmental
Protection,
C. W. Lawrence, ed. (New York: Plenum Press), pp. 249-288.
Bang, D. D., Verhage, R., Goosen, N., Brouwer, J., and van der Putte,
P. (1992). Molecular cloning of RADl8, a gene involved in differential
repair in Saccbafomyces cefevisiee. Nucl. Acids Res., in press.
Barnes, D. E., Tomkinson, A. E., Lehmann, A. R., Webster, A. D. B.,
and Lindahl, T. (1992). Mutations in the DNA ligase I geneof an individual with immunodeficienies
and cellular hypersensitivity
to DNAdamaging agents. Cell 69, 495-503.
Barrett, S. F., Robbins, J. H., Tarone, R. E., and Kraemer. K. H. (1991).
Evidence for defective repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers with
normal repair of other DNA photoproducts in a transcriptionally active
gene transfected into Cockayne syndrome cells. Mutat. Res. 255,281291.
Black, D. L. (1991). Does steric interference between splice sites block
the splicing of a short c-src neuron-specific exon in non-neuronal cells?
Genes Dev. 5, 389-402.
Bohr, V. A., Smith, C. A., Okumoto, D. S., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1985).
DNA repair in an active gene: removal of pyrimidine dimers from the
DHFR gene of CHO cells is much more efficient than in the genome
overall. Cell 40. 359-389.
Budd, M., and Mortimer, R. K. (1982). Repair of double-strand breaks
in a temperature conditional radiation-sensitive
mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mutat. Res. 703, 19-24.
Busch, D., Greiner, C., Lewis, K., Ford, R., Adair, G., and Thompson,
L. (1989). Summary of complementation groups of UV-sensitive CHO
mutants isolated by large-scale screening. Mutagenesis 4, 349-354.
Clark, M W., Zhong, W. W., Keng, T., Storms, R. K., Barton, A., Kaback, D. B., and Bussey, H. (1992). Identification of a Saccharomyces
cerevisiae homolog of the SNF2 transcriptional regulator in the DNA
sequence of an 8.8 kb region in the LTET-CYS7 interval on the left arm
of chromosome I. Yeast 8, 133-145.
Cleaver, J. E., and Kraemer, K. H. (1989). Xeroderma pigmentosum.
In The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease, Vol. 2, C. R. Striver,
A. L. Beaudet, W. S. Sly, and D. Valle, eds. (New York: McGraw-Hill),
pp. 2949-2971.
Davis, J. L., Kunisawa, R., and Thorner, J. (1992). A presumptive
helicase (MOT1 gene product) affects gene expression and is required
for viability in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12,
1879-1892.
de Weerd-Kastelein,
E. A., Keijzer, W., and Bootsma. D. (1972). Genetic heterogeneity of xeroderma pigmentosum demonstrated by somatic cell hybridization. Nature New Biol. 238, 80-83.
Dominski, Z., and Kole, R. (1991). Selection of splice sites in premRNAs with short internal exons. Mol. Cell. Biol. 71, 8075-6083.
Dominski, Z., and Kale. Ft. (1992). Cooperation of pre-mRNAsequence
elements in splice site selection. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 2108-2114.
Emery, H. S., Schild, D. S., Kellogg, D. E., and Mortimer, R. K. (1991).

Sequence of RAD54, a Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
recombination and repair. Gene 104, 103-106.

gene involved in

Flejter, W. L., McDaniel, L. D., Johns, D., Friedberg, E. C., and Schultz,
R. A. (1992). Correction of xeroderma pigmentosum complementation
group D mutant cell phenotypes by chromosome and gene transfer:
involvement of the human ERCCP DNA repair gene. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Bci. USA 89, 281-285.
Friedberg, E. C. (1985). DNA Repair (San Francisco:
and Company).

W. H. Freeman

Fryns, J. P., Bulcke, J., Verdu, P., Carton, H., Kleczkowska, A., and
Van der Berghe, H. (1991). Apparent late-onset Cockayne syndrome
and interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 10 (del(lO)(qll.23q21.2)). Am. J. Med. Genet. 40, 343-344.
Girdham, C. H., and Glover, D. M. (1991). Chromosome tangling and
breakage at anaphase result from mutations in lodestar, a Drosophila
gene encoding a putative nucleoside triphosphate-binding
protein.
Genes Dev. 5, 1788-1799.
Gorbalenya, A. E., Koonin, E. V., Donchenko, A. P.. and Blinov, V. M.
(1989). Two related superfamilies of putative helicases involved in
replication, recombination, repair and expression of DNA and RNA
genomes. Nucl. Acids Res. 77, 4713-4730.
Gulyas, K. D., and Donahue, T. F. (1992). SSLP. a suppressor of a
stem-loop mutation in the HIS4 leader encodes the yeast homolog of
human E/%X-3. Cell 89, 1031-1042.
Henderson, E. E., and Long, W. K. (1981). Host cell reactivation of
UV- and X-ray-damaged herpes simplex virus by Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-transformed
lymphoblastoid cell lines. Virology 775, 237-248.
Higgins, D. R., Prakash, 8, Reynolds, P., Polakowska, Ft., Weber, S.,
and Prakash, L. (1983). Isolation and characterization
of the RAD3
gene of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and inviability of RAW deletion
mutants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80, 5880-5884.
Huang, J. C., Svoboda, D. L., Reardon, J. T., and Sancar, A. (1992).
Human nucleotide excision nuclease removes thymine dimers from
DNA by incising the 22nd phosphodiester bond 5’and the 8th phosphodiester bond 3’tothe photodimer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA89,38643888.
Johnson, R. E., Henderson, S. T., Petes, T. D., Prakash, S., Bankmann, M., and Prakash, L. (1992). Saccharomyces cerevisiae RADSencoded DNA repair protein contains DNA helicase and zinc-binding
sequence motifs, and affects the stability of simple repetitive sequences in the genome. Mol. Cell. Biol. 72, 3807-3818.
Keijzer, W., Jaspers, N. G. J., Abraham% P. J., Taylor, A. M. R., Arlett,
C. F., Zelle, B., Takebe, H., Kinmont, P. D. S., and Bootsma, D. (1979).
A seventh complementation
group in excision deficient xeroderma
pigmentosum. Mutat. Res. 82, 183-190.
Kemp, B. E., and Pearson, R. B. (1990). Protein kinase recognition
sequence motifs. Trends Biochem. Sci. 75, 342-346.
Kozak, M. (1991). Structural features in eukaryotic mANAs that modulate the initiation of translation. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 19887-19870.
Lapeyre, B., Bourbon, H., and Amalric, F. (1987). Nucleolin, the major
nucleolar protein of growing eukaryotic cells: an unusual protein structure revealed by the nucleotide sequence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
84, 1472-I 478.
Laurent, B. C., Treitel, M. A., and Carlson, M. (1991). Functional interdependence of the yeast SNFZ, SNF5, and SNF6 proteins in transcriptional activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 2887-2891.
Laurent, B. C., Yang, X., and Carlson, M. (1992). An essential Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene homologous to SNF2 encodes a helicaserelated protein in a new family. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 1893-1902.
Lehmann, A. R. (1982). Three complementation
syndrome. Mutat. Res. 108, 347-356.

groups in Cockayne

Lehmann. A. R. (1987). Cockayne’s syndrome and trichothiodystrophy: defective repair without cancer. Cancer Rev. 7, 82-103.
Lommel, L., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1991). The genetic defect in the
Chinese hamster ovary cell mutant UV81 permits moderate selective
repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in an expressed gene. Mutat.
Res. 255, 183-l 91.
Mayne, L. V., and Lehmann, A. R. (1982). Failure of RNA synthesis to
recover after UV irradiation: an early defect in cells from individuals

Cell
952

with Cockayne’s syndrome and xeroderma pigmentosum.
42, 1473-1478.

Cancer Res.

mutant deficient in “mutation frequency decline” lacks strand-specific
repair: in vitro complementation
with purified coupling factor. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 11574-l 1578.

Mayne, L. V., Priestley, A., James, M. Ft., and Burke, J. F. (1986).
Efficient immortalization and morphological transformation of human
fibroblasts by transfection with SV40 DNA linked to adominant marker.
Exp. Cell Res. 762, 530-536.

Senapathy, P., Shapiro, M. 9.. and Harris, N. L. (1990). Splice junctions, branch point sites, and exons: sequence statistics, identification,
and applications to genome project. Meth. Enzymol. 783, 252-276.

Mellon, I., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1989). Induction of the Escherichia
co/i lactose operon selectively increases repair of its transcribed DNA
strand. Nature 342, 95-98.

Shivji, M. K. K., Kenny, M. K., and Wood, R. D. (1992). Proliferating
cell nuclear antigen is required for DNA excision repair. Cell 69, 367374.

Mellon, I., Bohr, V. A., Smith, C. A., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1966). Preferential DNA repair of an active gene in human cells. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 83, 8676-6882.

Simpson, N. E., and Cann, H. (1990). Report of the committee on the
genetic constitution of chromosome 10. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 55,
142-l 52.

Mellon, I., Spivak, G., and Hanawalt, P. C. (1967). Selective removal
of transcription-blocking
DNA damage from the transcribed strand of
the mammalian DHFR gene. Cell 57, 241-249.

Smerdon, M. J.. and Thoma, F. (1990). Site-specific DNA repair at the
nucleosome level in a yeast minichromosome.
Cell 67, 675-684.

Nance. M. A.. and Berry, S. A. (1992). Cockayne syndrome:
140 cases, Am. J. Med. Genet. 42, 68-84.

review of

Smith, C. W. J., Porro, E. B., Patton, J. G.. and Nadal-Ginard. B. (1989).
Scanning from an independently specified branch point defines the 3’
splice site of mammalian introns. Nature 342, 243-247.

Naumovski. L., and Friedberg, E. C. (1983). A DNA repair gene required for the incision of damaged DNA is essential for viability in
Saccharomycescerevisiee.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA86 4818-4821.

Sung, P., Prakash. L., Matson, S. W., and Prakash, S. (1987). RAD3
protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a DNA helicase. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 84, 8951-8955.

Oh, E. Y., and Grossman, L. (1987). Helicase properties of the Escherichia co/i UvrAB protein complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84,
3638-3642.

Sung, P., Prakash, S., and Prakash, L. (1988). The RAD6 protein of
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae polyubiquitinates
histones, and its acidic
domain mediates this activity. Genes Dev. 2, 1476-1485.

Orren, D. K., and Sancar. A. (1989). The (A)BC excinuclease of Escherichia colihas only the UvrB and UvrC subunits in the incision complex.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 5237-5241.

Tamkun, J. W., Deuring, R., Scott, M. P., Kissinger, M., Pattatucci,
A. M., Kaufman, T. C., and Kennison, J. A. (1992). brahma: a regulator
of Drosophila homeotic genes structurally related to the yeast transcriptional activator SNF2/SWl2. Cell 68, 561-572.

Orren, D. K., Selby, C. P., Hearst, J. E., and Sancar, A. (1992). Postincision steps of nucleotide excision repair in Escherichia co/i: disassembly of the UvrBC-DNA complex by helicase II and DNA polymerase I. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 760-788.
Peterson, C. L., and Herskowitz, I. (1992). Characterization
of the
yeast SW17, SW12, and SW13 genes, which encode aglobal activator of
transcription. Cell 68, 573-583.
Ptashne, M. (1988). How eukaryotic
Nature 335, 683-669.

transcriptional

activators

work.

Ribs, H. P., Jans, D. A., Fan, H., and Peters, R. (1991). The rate
of nuclear cytoplasmic protein transport is determined by the casein
kinase II site flanking the nuclear localization sequence of the SV40
T-antigen. EMBO J. 70, 633-639.
Robbins, J., Dilworth, S. M., Laskey, R. A., and Dingwall, C. (1991).
Two interdependent basic domains in nucleoplasmin nuclear targeting
sequence: identification of a class of bipartite nuclear targeting sequence. Cell 64,615-623.
Ruby, S. W.. and Abelson,
Trends Genet. 7, 79-85.

J. (1991). Pre-mRNA

splicing

in yeast.

Ruskin, E., Krainer, A. R., Maniatis, T., and Green, M. R. (1984). Excision of an intact intron as a novel lariat structure during pre-mRNA
splicing in vitro. Cell 38, 317-331.
Saeki, T., Machida, I., and Nakai, S. (1961). Genetic control of diploid
recovery after gamma-irradiation in the yeast S8cch8fomyces cefevisice. Mutat. Res. 73, 251-265.
Sambrook, J.. Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, Second Edition (Cold Spring Harbor, New
York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press).
Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. R. (1977). DNA sequencing
with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Nan. Acad. Sci. USA 74,54635467.
Saraste, M., Sibbald, P. R., and Wittinghofer, A. (1990). The P-loop:
a common motif in ATP- and GTP-binding proteins. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 75, 430-434.
Schild, D., Glassner, B. J.. Mortimer, R. K., Carlson, M., and Laurent,
9. C. (1992). Identification of RAD76, a yeast excision repair gene
homologous to the recombinational
repair gene RAD54 and to the
SNF2 gene involved in transcriptional activation. Yeast 8, 385-395.
Selby, C. P.. and Sancar. A. (1991). Gene- and strand-specific
in vitro: partial purification of a transcription-repair
coupling
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 8232-8236.

repair
factor.

Selby, C. P., Witkin, E. M., and Sancar, A. (1991). Escherichia colimfd

Tanaka, K., Kawai, K.. Kumahara, Y., Ikenaga, M., and Okada, Y.
(1981). Genetic complementation
groups in Cockayne syndrome.
Som. Cell Genet. 7, 445-455.
Tanaka, K., Miura, N., Satokata, I., Miyamoto, I., Yoshida, M.C., Satoh,
Y., Kondo, S., Yasui, A., Okayama, H.. and Okada, Y. (1990). Analysis
of a human DNA excision repair gene involved in group A xeroderma
pigmentosum
and containing a zinc-finger domain. Nature 348,
73-76.
Terleth. C., van Sluis, C. A., and van der Putte, P. (1989). Differential
repair of UV damage in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucl. Acids Res.
7 7,4433-4439.
Terleth, C., Schenk, P., Poot, R., Brouwer, J., and van der Putte, P.
(1990). Differential repair of UV damage in fad mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a possible function of G2 arrest upon UV irradiation.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 70, 4676-4664.
Thompson, L. H., Mitchell, D. L., Regan, J. D., Bouffler, S. D., Stewart,
S. A., Carrier, W. L., Nairn, R. S., and Johnson, R. T. (1988a). CHO
mutant UV61 removes (6-4) photoproducts but not cyclobutane dimers. Mutagenesis 4. 140-146.
Thompson, L. H., Shiomi, T., Salazar, E. P., and Stewart, S. A. (1988b).
An eight complementation group of rodent cells hypersensitive to ultraviolet radiation. Som. Cell. Mol. Genet. 74, 605-612.
Troelstra, C., Odijk, H., de Wit, J., Westerveld, A., Thompson, L. H.,
Bootsma, D., and Hoeijmakers, J. H. J. (1990). Molecular cloning of
the human DNA excision repair gene ERCC-6. Mol. Cell. Biol. 70,
5806-5813.
Troelstra, C., Landsvater, R. M., Wiegant, J., van der Ploeg, M., Viel,
G.. Buys, C. H. C. M., and Hoeijmakers, J. H. J. (1992). Localization
of the nucleotide excision repair gene fRCC6 to human chromosome
lOqll-q21.
Genomics 72, 745-749.
van Duin, M., de Wit, J., Odijk, H., Westerveld, A., Yasui, A., Koken,
M. H. M., Hoeijmakers. J. H. J., and Bootsma, D. (1986). Molecular
characterization
of the human excision repair gene ERCC-7: cDNA
cloning and amino acid homology with the yeast DNA repair gene
RAD70. Cell 44, 913-923.
van Duin, M., Vredeveldt, G., Mayne. L. V., Odijk, H., Vermeulen,
W., Klein, B., Weeda, G., Hoeijmakers, J. H. J., Bootsma, D., and
Westerveld, A. (1969). The cloned human DNA excision repair gene
ERCC-7 fails to correct xeroderma pigmentosum complementation
groups A through I. Mutat. Res. 277, 83-92.
van Houten, 9. (1990). Nucleotide
Microbial. Rev. 54. 16-51.

excision repair in Escherichia

co/i.

EFizC6 Involved in CS and Preferential

Repair

van Zeeland, A. A., Smith, C. A., and Hanawait, P. C. (1981). Sensitive
determination of pyrimidine dimers in DNA of t-IV-irradiated mammalian cells. Mutat. Res. 82, 173-189.
Venema, J. (1991). Gene specific repair of UV-induced DNA damage
in mammalian cells. PhD thesis, State University of Leiden, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
Venema, J., Mullenders, L. H., Natarajan, A. T., van Zeeland, A. A.,
and Mayne, L. V. (1990a). The genetic defect in Cockayne syndrome
is associated with a defect in repair of UV-induced DNA damage in
transcriptionally
active DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 47074711.
Venema, J., van Hoffen, A., Natarajan, A. T., van Zeeland, A. A., and
Mullenders, L. H. (1990b). The residual repair capacity of xeroderma
pigmentosum complementation
group C fibroblasts is highly specific
for transcriptionally
active DNA. Nucl. Acids Res. 18, 443-448.
Vermeulen, W., Osseweijer, P., de Jonge, A. J., and Hoeijmakers,
J. H. J. (1988). Transient correction of excision repair defects in fibroblasts of 9 xeroderma pigmentosum complementation
groups by microinjection of crude human cell extracts. Mutat. Res. 165, 199-206.
Vermeulen, W., Stefanini, M., Giliani, S., Hoeijmakers, J. H. J., and
Bootsma, D. (1991). Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group
H falls into complementation
group D. Mutat. Res. 255, 201-208.
Vrieling, H., Venema, J., van Rooyen, M. L., van Hoffen, A., Menichini,
P., Zdzienicka, M. Z., Simons, J. W., Mullenders, L. H., and van Zeeland, A. A. (1991). Strand specificity for UV-induced DNA repair and
mutations in the Chinese hamster HPRT gene. Nucl. Acids Res. 79,
241 I-241 5.
Weber,
(1990).
human
RADS.

C. A., Salazar, E. P., Stewart, S. A., and Thompson, L. H.
ERCCZ: cDNA cloning and molecular characterization
of a
nucleotide excision repair gene with high homology to yeast
EMBO J. 9, 1437-1447.

Weeda, G., van Ham, R. C. A., Masurel, R.. Westerveld. A., Odijk, H.,
de Wit, J., Bootsma, D., van der Eb, A. J., and Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.
(1990a). Molecular cloning and biological characterization
of the human excision repair gene ERCC-3. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 2570-2581.
Weeda, G., van Ham, R. C. A., Vermeulen, W., Bootsma, D., van der
Eb, A. J., and Hoeijmakers, J. H. J. (1990b). A presumed DNA helicase
encoded by ERCC-3 is involved in the human repair disorders xeroderma pigmentosum and Cockayne’s syndrome. Cell 62, 777-791.
Wen, L., Huang, J., Johnson, B., and Reeck, G. R. (1989). A human
placental cDNA clone that encodes nonhistone chromosomal protein
HMG-1. Nucl. Acids Res. 77, 1197-1214.
Wood, C. M., Timme, T. L., Hurt, M. M., Brinkley, B. R., Ledbetter.
D. H., and Moses, R. E. (1987). Transformation of DNA repair-deficient
human diploid fibroblasts with a simian virus 40 plasmid. Exp. Cell
Res. 169, 543-553.
Yagi,T.,andTakebe,
H.(1983). Establishment bySV40transformation
and characteristics of a cell line of xeroderma pigmentosum belonging
to complementation
group F. Mutat. Res. 172, 59-66.
Ye, R. D., Wun, T. C., and Sadler, J. E. (1987). cDNA cloning and
expression in Escherichia coliof a plasminogen activator inhibitor from
human placenta. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 3718-3725.
Zdzienicka, M. Z., van der Schans, G. P., and Simons, J. W. I. M.
(1988). Identification of a new seventh complementation group of UVsensitive mutantsin Chinese hamster cells. Mutat. Res. 194,165-170.
Zelle, B., Reynolds, R. J., Kottenhagen, M. J., Schutte, A., and Lohman, P. H. M. (1980). The influence of the wavelength radiation on
survival, mutation induction and DNA repair in irradiated Chinese hamster cells. Mutat. Res. 72, 491-509.
GenBank

Accession

The accession
LO4791.

Number

number

for the sequence

reported

in this paper is

