hypothalamus.6 D’Cruz et a17 suggest t h a t lesions even more
caudal in the brainstem may be associated with symptomatic
cataplexy.
As suggested by Stahl et a1,6 a rostra1 mesencephalic lesion
would damage descending inhibitory pathways, triggering the
neural system implicated in the generation of atonia during the
REM phase: pontine peri-locus ceruleus area, tegmentoreticular
pathway, reticularis magnocellularis nucleus, ventrolateral
reticulospinal tract, and spinal motor neurons.
From the Neurology Seruice, Hospital de Basurto, Bilhao, Spain
Presented in p a r t a t the 45th annual meeting of the Spanish Society of
Neurology, Barcelona, Decernher 1993.
Received February 24, 1994. Accepted in final form August 2, 1994.
Address correspondence a n d reprint requests to Dr. J . M . Fernandez,
Neurology Seruice, Hospital de Basurto, Auenida d e Monteuideo, 18,
48013 Bilbao, Spain.

References

Figure. An axial contrast-enhanced, Tl-weighted MRI
demonstrated a round mass with homogeneous enhancement in
the midbrain.
phonuclear cells [PMN], 30% lymphocytes, and 80% monocytes).
CSF examination showed a colorless liquid a t normal pressure
with 80 WBCs/mm3 (80% lymphocytes and 20% PMN), 41 mg/dl
glucose, and 60 mg/dl protein. A microbiologic study and serologic t e s t s ( s y p h i l i s , cryptococcosis, toxoplasmosis,
cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, herpesvirus, mumps, varicella,
and rubella) were negative. The radiologic study (contrast head
CT and MRI scans) showed a small, round lesion with marked
enhancement of contrast in the mesencephalic tegmentum and
periaqueductal area (figure); there were no signs of hydrocephalus or lesions in other locations, including the hypothalamus.
Assuming the probability of toxoplasmosis, treatment with
sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine was initiated and brought
about progressive improvement until all symptoms had disappeared after 2 weeks. Radiologic controls confirmed the regression of the lesion. A multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), repeated on two occasions during the phase of frank improvement,
failed to show either a decrease in sleep latency or sleep-onset
REM periods. HLA characterization was impossible due to
severe lymphopenia. The patient has remained asymptomatic
during the 18-month follow-up.
Discussion. Our patient had a midbrain lesion manifested by
cataplexy and sleep paralysis. The disappearance of the symptoms following antimicrobial treatment suggests a clear causal
relation. According to the criteria of the Association of Sleep
Disorders center^,^ a diagnosis of narcolepsy cannot be made
because the patient did not experience outright sleep attacks
and his MSLTs were negative, even though these tests were performed when t h e p a t i e n t w a s practically asymptomatic.
However, a negative MSLT does not exclude the diagnosis, and
most believe that if the clinical picture is accompanied by cataplexy, the diagnosis is assured.’
A review by Aldrich and Naylor* locates the causal lesion in
symptomatic narcolepsy in the hypothalamus with occasional
accompanying midbrain lesion^.^,^ In such cases, the symptoms
of atonia (cataplexy and sleep paralysis) are more evident. Our
case confirms this and shows that the midbrain lesion, without
hypothalamus involvement, would be sufficient to trigger onset
of the symptoms. This patient’s case is somewhat similar to that
of continuous cataplexy (“the limp man syndrome”)described in
association with a mesencephalic tumor extending into the
394 NEUROLOGY 45 February 1995

1.Aldrich MS. Narcolepsy. Neurology 1992;42(suppl 6):34-43.
2. Bonduelle M, Degos C. Symptomatic narcolepsies: a critical study. In:
Guilleminault C, Dement WC, Passouant P , eds. Narcolepsy. New
York Spectrum Publications, 1976:313-332.
3. Association of Sleep Disorders C e n t e r s a n d Association for t h e
Psychophysiological Study of Sleep. Diagnostic classification of sleep
and arousal disorders. Sleep 1979;2:1-137.
4. Aldrich MS, Naylor MW. Narcolepsy associated with lesions of the
diencephalon. Neurology 1989;39:1505-1508.
5. Anderson M, Salmon MV. Symptomatic cataplexy. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry 1977;40:186-191.
6 . S t a h l S M , L a y z e r RB, Aminoff M J , T o w n s e n d JJ, Feldon S.
Continuous cataplexy in a patient with a midbrain tumor: the limp
man syndrome. Neurology 1980;30:1115-1118.
7. D’Cruz OF, Vaughn BV, Gold SH, Greenwood RS. Symptomatic cataplexy in pontomedullary lesions. Neurology 1994;44:2189-2 191.

A novel mutation in exon 3 of the proteolipid
protein gene in Pelizaeus-Merzbacherdisease
V.M. Pratt, BS; S . Naidu, MD; S.R. Dlouhy, PhD; H.G. Marks,
MD; and M.E. Hodes, MD, PhD
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD), a n X-linked dysmyelinating disorder of the CNS, is characterized by nystagmus that
begins soon after birth, ataxia, titubation, and psychomotor
delay. Males with the connatal form of PMD usually die before
the end of their second decade. We have shown that the proteolipid protein gene (PLP)is linked to and implicated in the cause
of PMD,l,’ and have found a number of different mutations in
the PLP of patients with the
We report a boy with
PMD and a mutation in exon 3 of his PLP gene.
Methods. Clinical description. The propositus is a 3-year-old
boy whose maternal uncle died a t the age of 14 with a diagnosis
of “cerebral palsy.” The maternal uncle had strabismus, was
nonverbal, and never walked. The propositus was the product of
a 36-week pregnancy of a healthy woman. Labor and delivery
were normal. Birth weight was 2,750 grams, and Apgar scores
were 8 at 1minute and 9 a t 5 minutes. At birth he had grunting
lasting approximately 10 minutes. He was and continues to be
hypotonic. Physiologic jaundice did not exceed 10.7 mg/ml. At 3
months of age he developed nystagmus and head-noddinghobbing. At 5 months a n ophthalmologist found horizontal nystagmus of slow frequency and large amplitude, plus a vertical rotatory component. Developmental delay was noted a t 6 months,
and he was referred to a pediatric neurologist who found normal
EEG, serum amino acids, quantitative urine for organic acids,
CK, and thyroid function studies. MRI at 7 months was normal
for age. At 13 months his occipitofrontal circumference was 46
cm (within 5 2 SD), and he had head-bobbing with poor head
control, torsional nystagmus with both vertical and horizontal
components, truncal hypotonia, and hypotonia of t h e upper
extremities. There was a tendency to equinovarus and spontaneous Babinski signs. There was coarse dysmetria on reaching.
He could not sit. A repeat MRI at age 14 months showed
marked abnormalities in the white matter of the medulla. mid-

present only in the proband and his mother. The conservative
estimate of the frequency of this mutation is 0.007.
Discussion. Bridge and Wilkins6 reported a mutation a t
Lys15'-tAsn. Since this mutation results in a gain of a Mae I1
restriction site (personal communication), their point mutation
is a transversion, G449-+C.The effect of the Lysl50-tAsn mutation on the highly conserved PLP can only be conjectured. The
highly hydrophilic Lys is changed to the uncharged Asn, and the
balance of charge of PLP is more than likely affected. Based on
the model of Popot e t al,7 Lys150 is in the intracellular matrix
and is adjacent to an a-helical domain that spans the cell membrane. Although there are not enough family members for
genetic linkage anal sis, our current findings and the results of
Bridge and Wilkins support the hypothesis that L y ~ ~ ~ ~ - + A s n
causes disease.

il?

Figure. Sequencing gel showing site of mutation (arrow).
brain, thalami, and cerebral white matter. He also had abnormal visual evoked response and brainstem auditory evoked
responses. p-Galactosidase, arylsulfatase, and galactosylceramide P-galactosidase were normal, a s were very long-chain
fatty acids.
Mutation detection. Single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis5 amplification, sequencing of the PLP
ex on^,^ and primers4 were as described. For restriction analysis,
approximately 1 1.18of each PCR-amplified sample was digested
with Hph I (New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA) in accord with
the manufacturer's recommendations. The digested DNA was
size-fractionated on a 6%polyacrylamide gel for 1hour at 200 V
(data not shown). Single nucleotide primer extension (SNuPE)
was done as previously described.' The SNuPE primer was 5'AATGGCTAGGACATCCCGACAA-3'. c ~ ~ ~ P - ~was
G Tused
P to
detect t h e normal allele, I X ~ ~ P - ~ was
T T Pused to detect t h e
mutant allele, and o13'P-dATP was the negative control (data
not shown).
Results. During routine screening by SSCP of the seven exons
of the PLP gene, a shift was found in exon 3. Upon sequencing
that exon, a G+T transversion was found a t nucleotide 449 (figThe
ure). This transversion results in L y ~ ~ ' ~ + , A s(AAGAAT).
n
point mutation also causes the loss of a Hph I restriction site
(GGTGA[NI7l8). Because t h e mutation was difficult to detect
after restriction digestion (180 bp fragment in the normal control
and 196 bp fragment in the affected's amplified DNA), SNuPE
was used to confirm the presence of the mutation.
We have examined over 150 X chromosomes. The mutation is

From the Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics (V.M. Pratt, and
Drs. Dlouhy and Hodes), Indiana Uniuersity School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN; the Kennedy Krieger Institute IDr. Naidu), Baltimore,
MD; and the AI. Dupont Institute (Dr. Marks), Wilmington, DE.
Supported by a grant to M.E. Hodes from the United Leukodystrophy
Foundation.
Received March 31, 1994. Accepted in final form August 3, 1994.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. M . E . Hodes,
Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, 975 West Walnut Street,
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5251.

References
1.Trofatter JA, Dlouhy SR, DeMyer W, Conneally PM, Hodes ME.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: tight linkage to proteolipid protein gene
exon variant. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989;86:9427-9430.
2. Pratt VM, Kiefer JR, Lahdetie J, Schleutker J, Hodes ME, Dlouhy SR.
Linkage of a new mutation in the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene to
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) in a large Finnish kindred. Am J
Hum Genet 1993;52:1053-1056.
3. Pratt VM, Trofatter JA, Schinzel A, Dlouhy SR, Conneally PM, Hodes
ME. A new mutation in the proteolipid protein (PLP)gene in a German
family w i t h Pelizaeus-Merzbacher d i s e a s e . Am J Med Genet
1991;38:136-139.
4. Pratt VM, Trofatter JA, Larsen MB, Hodes ME, Dlouhy SR. New variant in exon 3 of the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene in a family with
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Am J Med Genet 1992;43:642-646.
5. Orita M, Suzuki Y, Sekiya T, Hayashi K. Rapid and sensitive detection
of point mutations and DNA polymorphisms using the polymerase
chain reaction. Genomics 1989;5:874-879.
6. Bridge PJ, Wilkins PJ. The role of proteolipid protein gene mutations
in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease [ a b s t r a c t ] . Am J Hum Genet
1992;51:A209.
7. Popot JL, Pham Dinh D, Dautigny A. Major myelin proteolipid: the 4a-Gelix topology. J Membr Biol i991;120:233-246.

February 1995 NEUROLOGY 45 395

