SAMT

VOL 76

21 OKT 1989

399

The identification of two low-density lipoprotein
receptor gene mutations in South African
familial hypercholesterolaemia
M. J. KOTZE, E. LANGENHOVEN, L. WARNICH,
C. J. J. OOSTHUIZEN, A. E. RETIEF

Summary
Two point mutations were discovered in the low-density
lipoprotein genes of patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). Defective genes were cloned and/or amplified by
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method and the DNA
sequences determined. A guanine to adenine base transition
in exon 4 was found to be the molecular defect in 20% of
cases of FH in the Afrikaner population. A second mutation, a
guanine to adenine base substitution in exon 9, was identified
in two homozygous FH individual~. Restriction enzyme analysis of PCR-amplified DNA from blood and tissue samples
now permits accurate diagnosis of these mutations.
S AIr Med J 1989; 76: 399-401.

L. DU PLESSIS,

M. P. MARX,

that an elevated level of LDL cholesterol is not always an
accurate indication of the disease, since overlapping values are
found in affected and unaffected individuals.
We have now cloned the defective genes and by DNA
sequence analysis two different single basepair (bp) mutations
have been identified. Amplification of genomic DNA from
blood and tissue samples by the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)8 method, using synthetic oligonucleotides specific for
the mutated exons, now permits accurate diagnosis of these
mutations after restriction enzyme digestion and electrophoresis of the DNA.

Material and methods
Patients and families

Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant
disease caused by mutations in the low-density lipoprotein
receptor (LDL-R) gene located on chromosome 19. 1 The
defective receptor causes LDL to accumulate to high levels in
plasma, which eventually leads to atherosclerosis and premature
heart attacks.
The prevalence of the disease is very high (1 in 80) in the
white Mrikaans-speaking section of ·the South Mrican population. 2 A founder gene effect has been suggested to explain the
high frequency of FH in this so-called Afrikaner population. 3
The Afrikaner has indeed a history of a small founder co=unity, which remained isolated through religious belief and
cultural bonds. We recently reported on the segregation of
genetic markers in and around the LDL-R gene in the FH
and unaffected Afrikaner populations. Evidence was presented
that at least two founders must have been responsible for the
high frequency of FH in this population group.4 Haplotype
studies showed that a presumed defective gene co-segregated
with the rare allele of a Nco I restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP)5 in 70% of FH families. A second
haplotype, determined by the rare allele of the Sru I enzyme, 6
co-segregated with a second gene defect in 20% of FH families.
This association was confirmed in genetic marker studies in 27
FH homozygotes. 7
To date the diagnosis of FH in South Africa relied on the
measurement of total or LDL cholesterol levels. It is known

MRC Cytogenetics Research Unit, Department of Human
Genetics, University of Stellenbosch, Parowvallei, CP
M. J. KOTZE, M.Se.

E. LANGENHOVEN, M.Se.
L. ·WAR TICH, M.Se.
L. DU PLESSIS, B.se. HO"iS
M. P. MARX, M.Se., PH.D.
C. J. J. OOSTHUIZEN, Mse., PH.D.
A. E. RETIEF, M.Se.,PH.D.
Accepred 8 Aug 1989.
Reprint requests [0: Professor A. E. Rerief. Depr of Human Genetics, University of
Steilenbosch Medical School, PO Box 63, Tygetberg, 7505 RSA.

Blood samples were obtained from the FH patients, their
families and normocholesterolaemic individuals, as previously
described. 4 .7

Genomic cloning
A genomic library was constructed in lambda L47.1 using
Bgl II digested DNA from an FH patient who was known to
have the rare allele of Sw I haplotype. A recombinant clone
(FH8-30) was isolated from the library using a 1,05 kb Psr I
subclone of pLDLR-3, a full-length cDNA clone, as a probe. 7
Restriction endonuclease mapping and Southern blotting
indicated that the 15 kb Bgl 11 clone FH8-30 contained exons
4 - 11 of the LDL-R gene. The insert also lacked the Sw I
binding site in exon 8. A 7 kb Hind Ill/Barn HI fragment of
the clone was further subcloned into pBR 328 and used for
DNA sequencing.

DNA amplification
Genomic and cloned DNA amplification using Taq polymerase (Amersham) was performed according to the procedure
described by Saiki er af.9 The following oligonucleotide primers
(Beckman Instruments) were used for amplification of specific
exons of the LDL-R gene:
Exon 4: 5' end - 5'-CATCCATCCCTGCAGCCCCC-3' (H)
3' end - 5'-CCATACCGCAGTTTTCCTCG-3' (I)
Exon 9: 5' end - 5'-GCTCCATCGCCTACCTCTTC-3'
3' end - 5'-CTGCAGATCATTCTCTGGGA-3'
The PCR products were used for either direct DNA sequencing or enzyme digestion and electrophoresis.

DNA sequencing
DNA fragments were sequenced by the dideoxy chaintermination method iO using the oligonucleotide primers specific
for the exons as described above. Both strands were sequenced
(Taq Track, Promega). The results were compared with the
normal sequence. !I

400

SAMJ

VOL 76

21 OCT 1989

Restriction digests of amplified DNA
Aliquots (50 J,LI) of amplified DNA sequences were digested
with the specific restriction enzyme and electrophoresed in 2%
agarose gels. The DNA fragments were stained with ethidium
bromide and visualised by ultraviolet fluorescence.

This mutation was observed by comparing the cloned
sequences with those found in a normal allele. The existence
of this mutation was further cOnIlIDled in DNA sequence
analysis of 3 additional FH patients who carry the rare Sru I
allele as a marker.

Restriction enzyme digests

Results
Single base substitution in exon 4
A single base substirution at position 523 was observed in
the DNA sequence of exon 4 of the LDL-R gene cloned from
an FH patient in whom the rare allele of the Sw I polymorphism co-segregates with the disease. In Fig. lA the guanine
to adenine transition is marked in the partial autoradiogram.

From the DNA sequence data of the normal and mutated
exon 4 and the known binding sites of the available restriction
enzymes, we deduced that there would be a loss of an Mho 11
enzyme binding site in DNA of individuals with the mutated
allele. DNA from a normal individual, the cloned fragment
(FH8-30) and a Sw I-associated FH patient was amplified by
peR and digested with Mho 11 (Fig. 2). DNA from the

B

A

EXON4
518

G

C
G

EXON9

GAT C

C
T

GAT C

1290

G
G
T

A

A

G-.A

A.-G

A

C

T
G
G
528 C

A
A

G
G

1280

Fig. 1. Autoradiograms o.f sequencing gels demonstrating point mutations in the LDL-R gene of Afrikaner FH patients.
A. The mu.tant se9~ence In exon 4 of a Stu I-associated allele. A guanine to adenfollikeline transition (G - A) is indicated
at nucleotide POSition 523. B. The mutant sequence of an Nco I-associated FH homozygote. A single base change from
guanine to adenine is indicated at nucleotide position 1285.

EXON 4

H

~

H

~

...

H

I

bp

1 2

3

400
220
180
Fig. 2. Gel electrophoresis of Mbo II-digested peR-amplified exon 4 DNA. The diagram shows the
mutation in exon 4 and the expected fragment sizes after Mbo 11 digestion. Lane 1: DNA from a
normal control individual. Lane 2: A cloned fragment from the rare Stu I allele. Lane 3: DNA from a
Stu I-associated FH heterozygote.

SAMT

normal individual was digested to completion, and fragments
of 220 and 180 bp were observed. The digestion of DNA from
the cloned fragment resulted in one fragment of 400 bp
indicating loss of the Mbo II binding site (lane 2). DNA from
a FH heterozygote showed heterozygosity after digestion by
Mbo II (lane 3). This confirms that the enzyme did not digest
the DNA of the mutated allele, while that of the normal allele
was digested.

Analysis of the exon 4 mutation in normal
and FH families
The presence of the exon 4 mutation, using PCR-amplified
DNA and restriction digestion with Mbo II, was studied in 2
informative FH families of whom 10 members were FH heterozygotes with the associated rare Sru I allele. The presence of
the mutation, as seen by the absence of the Mbo II restriction
site in the amplified DNA of affected heterozygotes, correlates
with high LDL cholesterol levels in these individuals. This is
a further confirmation that the exon 4 mutation dQes indeed
cause the disease in these families.
The absence of the mutation in 20 normal individuals, of
whom 6 were also found to have the associated rare Sru I
allele, further substantiates this finding.

VOL. 76

21 OKT 1989

401

Discussion
DNA" from a compound homozygote was cloned and the Sw
I-associated allele of the LDL-R gene was isolated from the
library for further characterisation. A point mutation was
observed in exon 4 of this allele, causing loss of an Mho II
binding site. Evidence that the mutation causes the disease in
these families was demonstrated in studies where the mutation
was seen to segregate with high LDL cholesterol levels. Preliminary data indicate that this mutation occurs in all Sru 1associated FH patients. Extrapolation of the haplotype data
indicates that the exon 4 mutation will account for about 20%
of the founder-related defect in the Afrikaner population.
In 2 FH homozygotes with the associated Nco I allele a
point mutation was found in exon 9. This mutation resulted in
the loss of an Mae II binding site. Population screening for the
incidence of this mutation in FH patients will reveal whether
all the Nco I-associated FH patients have the same exon 9
mutation of the gene.
Accurate diagnosis of these mutations is now possible by
Mho II and Mae II digestion of PCR-amplified DNA.
This study has shown that direct molecular diagnosis of
these gene mutations in familial hypercholesterolaemia is
simple, reliable and allows for rapid unequivocal diagnosis of
the disease. Identification of the defective genes in heterozygous parents also permits the prenatal diagnosis of homozygosity in chorionic or amniotic tissue of the fetus and offers
the possibility for termination of the pregnancy.

REFERENCES

Single base substitution in exon 9
A single base substitution at position 1285 was observed in
the DNA sequence of exon 9 from amplified DNA of 2 FH
homozygotes, in whom the rare allele of the Nco I RFLP cosegregates with the disease. In Fig. IB the guanine to adenine
transition is marked in the partial autoradiogram. The mutation
was observed by comparing the sequence data of exon 9 of
both alleles of two homozygotes with the sequence data from
normal controls.
From the sequence data of both the normal and the mutated
allele of exon 9, we deduced that there would be a loss of the
restriction enzyme binding site of the enzyme Mae II in
individuals with the mutated allele. Using the oligonucleotides
for exon 9 as primers, the amplified DNA from true homozygotes would not digest using the enzyme Mae II. The
heterozygotes would show a similar heterozygosity in fragment
sizes as was illustrated for exon 4 mutation. The Mae II
enzyme was not readily available for further studies prior to
publication.

I. Russell DW, Esser V, Hobbs HH. Molecular basis of familial hypercholestetolemia. Arteriosclerosis 1989; 9: suppl I, 1-8 - 1-13.
2. Jooste PL, Benade AJS, Rossouw JE. Ptevalence of familial hypetcholesterolaemia in three rural South African communities. S Afr Med J 1986; 69:
548-551.
3. Seftel HC, Baker SG, Sandlet MP ec al. A host of hypercholesterolaemia
homozygotes in South Africa. Br Med J 1980; 281: 633-636. . .
4. Kotze MJ, Langenhoven E, Retief AE eC al. Haplotype aSSOCiations of three
DNA polymotphisms at the human low denslry lipoprotem gene locus m
.
familial hypercholesterolaemia. J Med Genec 1987; 24: 750-755..
5. Korze MJ, Langenhoven E, Dietzsch E, Retief AE. A RFLP assopated with
the low densiry lipoprotein teceptor gene. Nucleze ACIds Res 1987; 15: 376.
6. Kotze MJ, Retief AE, Brink PA, Weich HFH. A DNA polymorphism m the
human low densiry lipoprotein receptor gene. S Afr MedJ 1986; 70: 77-79.
7. Korze MJ, Langenhoven E, Retief AE ec al. Haplorypes Identified by IQ
DNA restriction fragment length polymorphlsms at the human low denSity
lipoprotein receptor gene locus. J Med Genec 1989; 26: 255-259. .
8. Mullis KB, Faloona FA. Specific syntheSIS of DNA m vitro via a polymerase-catalyzed chain reaction. Mechods Enzymol1987; 155: 335-349..
9. Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S ec al. Pnmer-dltected enzymatlc amplIfication of DNA with a thermostable DNA polymerase. Science 1988; 239:
487-491.
.
.
..
10. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR. DNA sequencing With cham-termmatmg
inhibitors. Proe Nacl Aead Sei USA 1977; 74: 5463-5467.
11. Yamamoto T Davis GG, Brown MS eC al. The human LDL receptor: a
cysteine-rich protein with multiple Alu sequences in its mRNA. Cell 1984;
39: 27-38.

