THEJOURNAL
OF BIOLOGICAL
CHEMISTRY
(0 1992 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

Vol. 267, No. 19, Issue of July 5, pp. 13229-13238,1992
Printed in U.S A .

Molecular Cloning of Human Mevalonate Kinaseand Identification of
a Missense Mutation in theGenetic DiseaseMevalonic Aciduria*
(Received for publication, January 28, 1992)

Beverly L. SchaferS, Richard W. Bishop, Valerie J. Kratunis, StephenS. Kalinowski,
Stephen T. Mosley, K. Michael Gibson§, and Richard D. Tanakan
From the Department of Metabolic Diseases,the Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute,
Princeton, New Jersey 08543-4000and the §Kimberly H. Courtwright and Joseph W. Summers Metabolic DiseaseCenter,
Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75246

Mevalonic aciduria is the first proposed inherited branes as well as a precursor for steroid hormones, vitamin
disorder of the cholesterol/isoprene biosynthetic path- D, and bile acids. Regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis ocway in humans, and it is presumed to be caused by a curs principally at the step catalyzed by 3-hydroxy-3-methmutation in the gene coding for mevalonate kinase. ylglutaryl-CoA
To
reductase (1).However, other enzymes in the
elucidate the molecular basis
of this inherited disorder, pathway are also involved in regulation of cholesterol biosyna 2.0-kilobase human mevalonate kinase cDNA clone thesis. Recentevidence indicates thatmevalonate kinase (EC
was isolated and sequenced. The 1188-base pair open 2.7.1.36; ATP(R)-mevalonate 5-phosphotransferase), the first
reading framecoded for a 396-amino acid polypeptide
enzyme in the pathway to
follow 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylwith a deduced M, of 42,450. The predicted protein
sequence displayedsimilarity tothose of galactokinase CoA reductase, canplay an importantregulatory role because
and the yeast RARl protein, indicating that theymay its activity may be controlled by feedback inhibition (2-5).
belong to a common gene family. Southern hybridiza- Geranyl pyrophosphate and farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP)’
tion studies demonstrated that the mevalonate kinase are distal intermediates in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathgene is located on human chomosome 12 andis a single way that inhibit mevalonate kinase activity by binding comenzyme (2, 3). This
copy gene. No major rearrangements were detected in petitively at the ATP-binding site on the
the mevalonic aciduria subject. The relative size (2 feedback inhibition is thought to function in the regulation
kilobases) and amounts of human mevalonate kinase of the intracellular concentrationof FPP. When intracellular
mRNA were not changed in mevalonic aciduria fibro- levels of FPP are elevated, feedback inhibition would block
blasts. Approximately half of the mevalonic aciduria mevalonate kinase activity and curtail further
F P P synthesis.
cDNA clones encoding mevalonate kinase containeda Regulation of the intracellular concentration of F P P is imsingle base substitution(A to C)in thecoding regionat portant because F P P is a key intermediate at a branch point
nucleotide 902 that changed an asparagine residue
to in the pathway. In mammalian cells, FPP is a precursor for
a threonine residue. The presence
of this missense muthe biosynthesis of many vital cellular components such as
tation was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction
amplification and allele-specific hybridization of the cholesterol, dolichols, ubiquinones,farnesylated proteins, and
genomic DNAs from the proband and the proband’s heme A (1, 6). Therefore, feedback regulation of mevalonate
kinase activity may serve to maintain thesize of one or more
father and brother. Similar analysis failed to detect
intracellular pools of FPP that are used by multiple biosynthis mutation in the proband’s mother, seven normal
subjects, or four additional mevalonic aciduria sub- thetic pathways.
A mutation in the gene coding for mevalonate kinase
is
jects, indicating that the mutation
does not represent a
common gene polymorphism. Functional analysis of presumed to cause the geneticdisease mevalonic aciduria,
the defect by transient expression confirmed that the which is the first proposed inherited disorder of the cholesmutation produced an enzyme with diminished activ- terol biosynthetic pathway in humans (7, 8). Mevalonic aciity. Our datasuggest that the index
case is a compound duria is transmitted as an autosomal
recessive trait, and there
heterozygote for a mutation in the mevalonate kinase are at leastseven reported cases of this genetic disease (7, 9,
gene.
10). Cells taken from subjects with mevalonic aciduria have
<lo% of the normal levels of mevalonate kinase activity (9,
ll), andall subjects have massive accumulation of mevalonate
in both their serum and urine (7,8,10). Inofspite
the marked
Cholesterol is an essential component
of cellular mem- reduction in mevalonate kinase activity, subjects with meva* The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by lonic aciduria have nearly normal levels of serum cholesterol
the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby (7,8). Cells taken from these subjects also appear to synthemarked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 size nearly normal amountsof cholesterol (11,12). These data
solely to indicate this fact.
suggest that either the smallresidual amount of mevalonate
The nucleotide sequence(s)reported in thispaperhas been submitted kinase activity in these
cells is capable of maintaining normal
to the GenBankTM/EMBL Data Bank with accessionnumber(s)
rates
of
cholesterol
biosynthesis
or that a mutation in the
“3468.
loss of enzyme activity
$ To whom correspondence should be addressed Dept. of Metabolic enzyme causes rapid denaturation and
Diseases, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Inst., when cells are disrupted for enzymaticanalysis. The molecuP . 0. Box 4000, Princeton, NJ 08543-4000. Tel.: 609-252-6347; Fax:
609-252-6802.
B Present address: Dept. of Molecular Pharmacology, Arris Pharmaceutical Corp., South San Francisco, CA 94080.

’ The abbreviations used are: FPP, farnesyl pyrophosphate; SDS,
sodium dodecyl sulfate; bp, base pair(s); kb, kilobase(s); PCRs, polymerase chain reactions.

13229

13230

Identification Missense
of a Mutation

lar defect causing this genetic disease is still unknown. As a
first
step
in
elucidating the molecular
basis
of this
inherited disorder, we have isolated a cDNA clone coding for
human mevalonate kinase, and we have used the DNA sequence to identify a mutation in themevalonate kinase gene
from a subject with mevalonic aciduria.
EXPERIMENTALPROCEDURES

Materials-A human skin fibroblast XgtllcDNA library, a human
B-lymphocyte Xgtll library, and Escherichia coliY1090 were purchased from Clontech. A Xgtll cDNA library (MKlT) derived from
mRNA purified from fibroblasts of the mevalonic aciduria index case
(Z. W.) was prepared by Invitrogen. Other materials were purchased
from the manufacturers as follows: A.S.A.P. genomic DNA isolation
kit, Boehringer Mannheim; oligo(dT)-cellulose, human genomic
DNA, and M13mp18 and M13mp19 sequencing vectors, Pharmacia
LKB Biotechnology Inc.; chromosomal test panel blots and SpeedHyb solution, Bios Corp.; Sequenase kit, U. S. Biochemical Corp.;
GeneAmp DNA hybridization reagent kit, Perkin-Elmer Cetus Instruments; custom-synthesizedgel-purifiedoligonucleotides,
The
Midland Certified Reagent Co.; pGEM vectors and T7 DNA polymerase sequencing systemkits,Promega
Biotec; minimalessential
medium, Opti-MEM,lipofectin reagent, and DH5aF' competent
cells,
LifeTechnologies
Inc., fetal calf serum, HyClone Laboratories;
[a-'"PIdCTP (3000 Ci/mmol), [ T - ~ ' P ] ~ A T(7000
P
Ci/mmol), 35SdATP (3000 Ci/mmol), and (R)-[5-'4C]mevalonic acid 5-phosphate
(58 mCi/mmol),Amersham Corp.; and [3H]mevalonolactone (27.5
Ci/mmol), DuPont-New England Nuclear. The SV40-Ad2 construct
was supplied by Yakov Gluzman (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory),
and the pCMV5 vector was a gift from David W. Russell (University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas).
Cell Lines-Normal fibroblasts and fibroblasts
from the mevalonic
aciduria index case (Z. W.) and the proband's family (mother, father,
and brother) were transformed with an SV40-Ad2 construct (13).
Cells were grown (at 37 "C in humidified air containing 5% CO,) in
minimal essential medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum,
100 units/ml penicillin, 100 pg/ml streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine. Confluent monolayers of cells were rinsed twice with 5 ml of
ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline, scraped into 2 ml of ice-cold
phosphate-buffered saline, and collected by centrifugation at 1200 X
g for 10 min at 4 "C. Cell pellets were frozen in dry ice/ethanol and
stored a t -70 "C. COS-7 cells were grown under the same conditions
in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal
calf serum, 100 units/ml penicillin, and 100 pg/ml streptomycin.
Isolation of cDNA Clones-Approximately 1 X lo6 recombinants
from both a human skin fibroblast cDNA library and B-lymphocyte
cDNA library were screened with a full-length rat mevalonate kinase
cDNA clone (14) radiolabeled by random priming (15) to a specific
activity of 5 X 10' cpmlpg. Plaque hybridization was performed as
described (14). The nitrocellulose filters were washed twice a t 68 "C
with 2 X SSC (1 X SSC = 0.15 M NaCI, 0.015 M sodium citrate (pH
7.0)) containing0.1% SDS andwashed twice with0.1 X SSC containing 0.1% SDS. Nine cDNA clones were isolated from the human skin
fibroblast library, and six cDNA clones were isolated from the Blymphocyte library. Approximately 1 X lo6 recombinants from the
M K l T (mevalonic aciduria) cDNA library were screened by the same
procedure, and 12 cDNA clones were isolated. All cDNA inserts were
subcloned into the pGEM-3Z vector for restriction enzyme mapping
or into M13mp18 and M13mp19 for DNA sequencing.
DNA Sequencing of cDNA Clones-The DNA sequence was determined by the dideoxynucleotide chain termination method (16). Sequencing reactions using Sequenase's modified T7 DNA polymerase
were performed following the manufacturer'sprotocol. The DNA and
protein sequences were aligned andcomparedtorat
mevalonate
kinase cDNA and protein sequencesusing the Intelligenetics and
PCGene computer programs. The Swiss Protein and PIR databases
were also searched for other proteins that show amino acid sequence
similarity to humanmevalonate kinase.
Southern Blot Analysis-Normal human genomic DNA (10pg) and
genomic DNA isolated from fibroblasts from the mevalonic aciduria
index case (Z. W.) were digested with restriction endonucleases. DNA
fragments were separated by electrophoresis through a 1.0% agarose
gel, transferred toa BioTrans nylon membrane, andcovalently linked
using a UV Stratalinker. Each membrane was hybridized overnight
at 42 "C with a radiolabeled EcoRIIPstI cDNA fragment (specific

in Mevalonic Aciduria
activity = 1 X 10' cpm/pg) that spans the entire human mevalonate
kinase coding region. The hybridization solution contained50% formamide, 5 X SSPE (1 X SSPE = 0.15 M NaC1,0.25 M NaH2P04,1 mM
EDTA), 5 X Denhardt's solution (1X Denhardt's = 0.2% Ficoll, 0.2%
polyvinylpyrrolidone, 0.2% bovine serum albumin fraction V), 1%
SDS, 1 mM NaPPi, and 100 pg/ml denatured salmon sperm DNA.
The membranes were washed twice at 65 "C in 1 X SSC, 1%SDS
and then twice a t 65 "C in 0.1 X SSC, 1% SDS. The BioTrans nylon
membranes were dried, and theradiolabeled bands were visualized by
autoradiography.
RNA Blot Analysis-Poly(A)'
RNAs(15 pg) were isolated(17)
from normal human fibroblasts and fibroblasts from the mevalonic
aciduria index case, electrophoresed on a1.2% agarose gel containing
1.1% formaldehyde, and transferred to BioTrans nylon membranes.
The RNA was cross-linkedto the membrane
using aUV Stratalinker;
prehybridized for 4 h
at 42 "C in a solution containing 50% (v/v)
formamide, 7% SDS, 0.25 M NaHP04 (pH 7.2), 0.25 M NaC1, 1 mM
EDTA,and 100 pg/ml salmon sperm DNA; andthen hybridized
overnight at 42 "C witharadiolabeled
350-bp EcoRVIBglI DNA
fragment (specific activity = 2 X lo8 cpm/pg) of the human mevalonate kinase cDNA clone. The membrane was washed twice a t 65 "C in
0.25 M NaHPO, (pH 7.2), 0.5% SDS, and 1 mM EDTA; followed by
two washes in 0.05 M NaHP04 (pH7.2), 0.5% SDS, and 1 mM EDTA
a t 65 "C. The radiolabeled bands were visualized by autoradiography.
The nitrocellulose membrane was stripped in boiling water and then
rehybridized by the same method to an actin
cDNA probe radiolabeled
to a specific activity of 2 X 10' cpm/pg.
Chromosomal Localization-Chromosomal test panel blots were
obtained containing 5 pg each of genomic DNAs from 25 different
hamster-humansomatic cell hybridlines. The samples had been
digested with EcoRI restriction endonuclease, and the DNA fragments were separated by electrophoresis through a 1.0% agarose gel
before transfer to nitrocellulose membranes. Following the manufacturer's protocol, the membranes were hybridized overnight a t 65 "C
with a random-primed radiolabeled 430-bp PstIIEcoRI DNA fragment (specific activity - 1.1 X lo9cpm/pg) from the full-length human
mevalonatekinasecDNAclone,washed
at 65 "C, andautoradiographed.
Polymerase Chain Reactions-Genomic DNAs from normal subjectsandthe
mevalonicaciduriaindexcase
were prepared from
cultured cell lines. A208-bp region surrounding the putative mutation
was amplified in these genomic DNA samples using oligonucleotide
primers based on the sequence obtainedfromthehuman
cDNA
clones. A sense primer (5'-TGGGCATAGGACCTTGGCCT-3')
and
anantisenseprimer
(5'-GAGGAGTGTGATGCCACAGCCAC-3')
were synthesized and gel-purified. The polymerase chain reactions
(PCRs) were performed on a Perkin-Elmer Cetus DNA thermal
cycler
using conditions described by the manufacturer (GeneAmp kit) with
a 1 p~ concentration of each primer and 200 ng of genomic DNA
templatein a100-pl reaction volume. Initially,the reaction was
heated for 5 min at 95 "C for complete denaturation prior tocycling;
35 cycles were then carried out witha cycle profile of 2 min a t 95 "C,
1 min at 55 "C, and 2 min at 72 'C, with a final extension step at
72 "C for 5 min. For direct DNAsequencing of the PCR product,five
identical reactions were pooled, and thereaction product was precipitated with ethanol. The DNA was resuspended in 10 mM Tris (pH
7.4), 1 mM EDTA and electrophoresed on a preparative 2% NuSieve
agarose gel. The DNA was recovered with NA45 paper following the
manufacturer's protocol. The purified DNA was sequenced directly
with Promega's T7 DNA polymerase sequencing system kit using an
internal
primer
the
to
sense strand
(5"CAGCTTGCTGTGAAGTCCGC-3').Approximately
500 ng of template DNA was
added to 4 pmol of primer and heated to 98 "C for 8 min and then
cooled a t room temperature for 1 min. Extensions were carried out
on ice with theaddition of 0.5 pl of 35S-dATP, 1.0 pl of 0.1 M
dithiothreitol, 2.0 p1 of diluted (1:lO) labeling mixture, 2.0 pl of 5 X
sequencing buffer, and 2.0 pl of a dilution (1%)of T7 DNA polymerase. 3.5 pl of this mixture was removed andadded to a mixture
containing 2.5 pl of each dideoxynucleotide triphosphate mixture.
The reaction was incubated a t 37 "C for 3 min and was stopped with
4 pl of the formamide dye mixture. The reactions were heated a t
95 "C for5 minpriorto
loadingon a 6% sequencing gel. The
radiolabeled bands were visualized by autoradiography.
Allele-specific Oligonucleotide Hybridization-Genomic DNA samples were prepared from both normal and
mevalonicaciduria cell
lines. PCR amplification of the DNA region containing the putative
mutation was performed as described above. Approximately 200 ng

Identification
Missense
a ofMutation
of the DNA was dried down to a volume of 10 pl, and 1 pl of 5 N
NaOH was added to denature each sample. The samples were then
spotted onto BioTransnylon membranes and dried. Duplicatemembranes were prepared for hybridization with either the radiolabeled
normal or mutant oligonucleotides. The membraneswere hybridized
for 4 h at 55 ‘C in0.9 M NaCl, 0.2 M Tris (pH 8.01, 5 mM EDTA,
0.5% dried milk, and 1%SDS with a 1.3 X 10’ cpm/ml concentration
of either the normal oligonucleotide (5”ATTGACATGAACCAGCACCAT-3’)or the mutant (mevalonic aciduria)oligonucleotide
(5’-ATTGACATGACCCAGCACCAT-3’)
radiolabeled at the 5’-terminus with 32P.
The blots were washed in 1 X SSC, 1%SDS at room
temperature to remove background. The wash temperature was then
increased to 60 or 65 ‘C for the normal and mutant probes, respectively. The radiolabeled bands were visualized by autoradiography.
Transfection Analysis-Standard methods were used to construct
the normal and mutant mevalonate kinase expression plasmids.
Briefly, a 1.3-kb EcoRIIPstI fragment containingthe coding sequence
of the normal human mevalonate kinase cDNA was inserted intothe
eukaryotic expression vector pCMV5, a derivative of pCMV4 (18).
The mutant expression construct was made by substituting into the
normal expression construct a 821-bp EcoRVIPstI fragment from one
of the mutant cDNAs obtained through the cDNA library screening.
The sequence of the mutant insert was verified by automated sequencing using fluorescence-labeled primers (19) and a DNA Sequencer
(Model 373A, Applied Biosystems, Inc.). Liposome-mediated transfection of COS-7 cells was performed according to the manufacturer.
Subconfluent culturesin 100-mm dishes were transfected with 26 pg
of the vector alone, the normal mevalonate kinase construct, or the
mutant construct for 16 h in 7 ml of serum-free media. Following 40
h of expression inminimal essential medium and 10% fetal calf
serum, the cells were harvested in 250 pl of 100 mM KH,PO,, 10 mM
dithiothreitol, 10 mM KF and lysed by sonication. Cellular debris was
removed by centrifugation at 1000 X g for 5 min, and supernatant
protein concentrations were determined (20). 20 pg of protein was
used to measure mevalonate kinase activity by radiochemical assay
(21). SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting
were as described (2) using 300 pg of protein and a polyclonal antibody

in Mevalonic
Aciduria

13231

otides until a SacI restriction site was reached. The DNA
sequence of the remaining 950 nucleotides from the SacI site
to the poly(A) tail of the 3.0-kb clone was identical to the
full-length human cDNA sequence from nucleotides 886 to
1972. The presence of a consensus splice site signal immediately 5’ of the SacI site
suggests that the first
2101 nucleotides
are within the intron
sequence derived from incomplete splicing of the mRNA (see Fig. 7). The DNAsequence of the
intron region was used in later studies to
produce primers for
PCR amplification.
Analysis of Deduced Amino Acid Sequence of Human Mevalonate Kinase-With a single residue gap inserted in the
deduced amino acid sequence of rat mevalonate kinase, there
was an 82%homology between the human and rat amino
acid
sequences (Fig. 1).The deduced molecular weight of human
mevalonate kinase (42,450) is only slightly larger than the
molecular weight of the rat enzyme (41,990). Based on the
hydropathy profile, human mevalonate kinase, like rat mevalonate kinase, isa very hydrophobic protein, with an overall
index of hydropathy of +0.06 (22); and hydrophobic amino
acids compose 45% of the total amino acids. The consensus
sequence for aputative ATP-binding site
previously identified
in ratmevalonate kinase is also present in the human
enzyme
(14).
Protein Sequence Similarities-Computer-assisted searches
of the Swiss Protein and PIR data
basesidentified three
regions in the protein sequence of human mevalonate kinase
that showed strongidentitytotheamino
acidsequences
reported for galactokinase (23-26), the yeast RARl protein
(27), the yeast GAL3 protein (28), and the yeast phosphomevalonate kinase protein (29). Region A spans 27 amino
generated against purified
rat mevalonate kinase. Therat mevalonate acids, region B spans 22 amino acids, and region C spans 12
amino acids inlength (Fig. 2). Consensus sequences were
kinase used as a standard was purified as described (2).
identified in each region. When compared over the length of
the protein, the relative locations of these motifs were also
RESULTS
found to be spatially conserved (Fig. 3), suggestive of a close
Isolation and DNA Sequence Analysis of cDNA Clone Coding
evolutionary linkage for these proteins.
for Human Mevalonate Kinase-Six human mevalonate kiChromosomal Localization of Mevalonate Kinase-The
nase cDNA clones (pHMK1-pHMK6) were initially isolated
chromosomallocation of the mevalonatekinase gene was
after screening 1 X IO6 recombinants from a human B-lymdetermined by hybridizing a radiolabeled PstIIEcoRI DNA
phocyte cDNA library with the radiolabeled rat mevalonate
kinase cDNA. The sizes of the cDNA inserts in these clones fragment of the humanmevalonate kinase cDNA to a Southranged from 3.0 to 1.6 kb. All of the cDNAs were subcloned ern blot containing DNA purified from 25 different hamsterinto sequencing vectors, and the DNA sequence was deter- human somatic cell hybrids. The PstIIEcoRI DNA fragment
mined. The resulting DNA sequences were compared to the that derived from the 3”untranslatedregion of the cDNA did
not cross-hybridize to the hamstergene homolog. The radioknown nucleotide sequence for rat mevalonate kinase (14);
labeled cDNAhybridized to an -3-kb DNA fragmenton
and althoughthere was strongconservation of theDNA
sequence,each of the isolatedclones contained a deletion Southern blots from four hamster-human hybrid cell lines.
ranging in size from 150 to 300 bp within the
5‘-coding region. Comparison of the content of human chromosomes in these
To obtain a full-length cDNA clone, a 1.6-kb cDNA insert hybrid cell lines versus cell lines that did not hybridize to the
kinase gene
from one of these clones was used to screen a human skin radiolabeled probe indicated that the mevalonate
fibroblast cDNAlibrary. Nine clones were isolated after is located on human chromosome 12 (Table I). There were no
screening 1 X lo6 recombinants, and the sizes of the cDNA discordant hybrid cell lines.
Southern Hybridization Analysis of Genomic DNAs from
inserts in these clones ranged from 2.0 kb to 500 bp. The
DNA sequences of two different 2.0-kb cDNA inserts Normal and Mevalonic Aciduria Subjects-To determine if
(pHMK101 and pHMK104) were determined (Fig. 1). The the mevalonic aciduria index case has a major rearrangement
cDNA contained a 1188-bp open reading frame and
coded for of the mevalonate kinase gene, genomic DNA was isolated
from the proband
a 396-amino acid polypeptide with a predicted M, of 42,450 from either normal fibroblasts or fibroblasts
assuming translational initiation at the first methionine co- and digested with eight separate restriction endonucleases.
don. The689-bp 3”untranslated region contained a consensus Southern blot hybridization studies showed identical restricDNAsamples, indicating that the
polyadenylationsignal (AATAAA), and a poly(A) tail was tionfragmentsinboth
reduced level of mevalonate kinase activity in the index case
located 17 bp downstream from this site.
One of the 3.0-kb cDNA clones (pHMK4) isolated from the does not resultfrom a major rearrangement of the mevalonate
kinase gene (Fig. 4). Data using a smaller (122-bp) fragment
B-lymphocyte cDNA library was also subcloned into a sequencing vector, and thenucleotide sequencewas determined. of radiolabeled cDNA forSouthern blot analysis also suggests
There was no sequence conservation to the humanmevalon- that the genomicDNAcodingformevalonate
kinase is a
ate kinase cDNA sequence observed for the first 2101 nucle- single copy gene (data not shown).

13232

Identification of a Missense Mutationin Mevalonic Aciduria
-91
1

CAAAACAAAAGGTAGTGGGGAGCTGCTCCGGCTTCGGCGCGGAGGGGCGGCGGCCGGGGAGGCGGCGGCGGCGGCAGGATTCCCAGGAGCC

ATGTTGTCAGAAGTCCTACTGGTGTCTGCTCCGGGGAAAGTCATCCTTCATGGAGAACATGCCGTGGTACATGGCAAGGTAGCACTGGCT
METLeuSerGluValLeuLeuValSerRlaProGlyLysValIleLeuHi~GlyGluHisAlaValValH~~GlyLy~V~lAl~LeuAl~
30
.

91

.

f

*

l

~

~

*

+

~

*

.

.

+

f

.

*

.

~

*

~

.

.

GTATCCTTGAACTTGAGAACATTCCTCCGGCTTCAACCCCACAGCAATGGGAAAGTGGACCTCAGCTTACCCAACATTGGTATCAAGCGG
V ~ l S e r L e U A 9 n L e ~ A ~ q T h r P h e L e u A r g L e u A r q L e u G l ~ P ~ o H i ~ S ~ r A s n G l y L y ~ V ~ l A ~ p L e ~ S e r L e u P r ~ A ~ ~ l l e G60l y I l e L y ~ A ~ q
* Ala * *
Val
Arg
Gln
* * * * Ser * Asn
* Val
* Gln
f

f

f

f

181

GCCT~GGATGTGGCCAGGCTTCAGTCACTGGACACAAGCTTTCTGGAGC~GGTGATGTCACAACACCCACCTCAGAGCAAGTGGAGAAG
AlaTrpAspValAlaArgLeuGlnSerLeuAspThrSerPheLeuGluGlnGlyAspValThrTh~P~oTh~SerGluGlnValGl~Lys 90
Val
* *
Thr
Leu *
Gly *
* *
ProAla *
Leu * * Leu
*

271

CTAAAGGAGGTTGCAGGCTTGCCTGACGACTGTGCTGTCACCGAGCGCCTGGCTGTGCTGGCCTTTCTTTACTTATACCTGTCCATCTGC
LeuLy~GluValAlaGlyLeuProA~pA~pCysAlaValTh~GluArqLeuAlaValLeuAlaPheLeuTy~LeuTy~LeuSerIleCys
120
* Lys
* * Arg
* ValGlyAsn
Gly * SerLeU *
*
*
* Ala * *

361

CGGAAGCAGAGGGCCCTGCCGAGCCTGGATATCGTAGTGTGGTCGGAGCTGCCCCCCGGGGCGGGCTTGGGCTCCAGCGCCGCCTACTCG
ArgLySGlnArgAlaLeuProSerLeuA~pIleValValTr~Se~GluLeuP~oProGlyAlaGlyLeuGlySe~Se~AlaAlaTy~Ser
150
+ ~ ~ ' ~ ~ ~ ' * ' " " e ~ , ~ ' * ' * . * . * * * ~ * ~ ~ * *

451

GTGTGTCTGGCAGCAGCCCTCCTGACTGTGTGCGAGGAGATCCCAAACCCGCTGAAGGACGGGGATTGCGTCAACAGGTGGACCAAGGAG

f

f

f

FIG. 1. Nucleotide and predicted
of human
amino acidsequences
mevalonate kinase and comparison
to rat mevalonate kinase. Nucleotides
and aminoacids are numberedto theleft
and right, respectively, with position 1
being assignedto the first
nucleotide and
residue of the coding sequence.The consensus polyadenylation
signal
(AATAAA) is underlined. Thesite of the
missense mutation is indicated (6)a t
nucleotide 902. Theprotein sequences
are shown in single letter code. The human and rat mevalonate kinase protein
sequenceshavebeenaligned
withthe
introduction of a single gap a t residue
394 to maximize identity. Asterisks denote identical amino acids. The two sequencessharedan
overall identity of
82%.

ValCysLeuAlaAlaAlaLeuLeuThrValCysGluGluIleProAsnProLeuLysA~pGlyA~pCysValAsnA~qT~pThrLysGl~
180
Val *
* * * * Ala
ValThr * *
ArgGlySerIleGlySer * ProGlu

.

.

.

.

54

1GATTTGGAGCTAATTAACAAGTGGGCCTTCCAAGGGGAGAGAATGATTCACGGGAACCCCTCCGGAGTGGACAATGCTGTCAGCACCTGG
A s p L e u G l U L e U I l e A s n L y s T r p A l a P h e G l n C l y G l y G l ~ A r g M e t I l e H i ~ G l y A ~ ~ P ~ ~ S e ~ G l y V a l A ~ p A ~ ~ A l ~210
V~lSerTh~T~p
f
t LysSer *
* I t
TyrGIU * *
Val
1
f
*
f
Ser f 1
1

631

GGAGGAGCCCTCCGATACCATCAAGGGAAGATTTCATCCTTAAAGAGGTCGCCAGCTCTCCAGATCCTGCTGACCAACACCAAAGTCCCT
GlyGlyAlaLeuArqTyrHisGlnGlyLysIleSerSerLe~Ly~ArqSerProAlaLeuGlnIleLeuLeuThrAsnThrLysValP~o 2 4 0
II
* t +Gin+ * "et'
II
f
t
*Leu'
t
f
* f 1/ II * * t II *

121

CGCAATACCAGGGCCCTTGTGGCTGGCGTCAGAAACA~CTGCTCAAGTTCCCAGAGATCGTGGCCCCCCTCCTGACCTCAATAGATGCC
ArgAsnThrArqAlaLeuValAlaGlyValArgAsnA~qLeuLeuLysPheP~oGluIleValAl~P~oLeuLeuTh~SerIleAspAla
270
I
f
+ ' S e r i* I l e +
*
+Met'
* *
*
f
'Ser*Lys*

811

ATCTCCCTGGAGTGTGAGCGCGTGCTGGGAGAGATGGGGGAAGCCCCAGCCCCGGAGCAGTACCTCGTGCTGGAAGAGCTCATTGACATG
IleSerLeuGlUCysGluArgValLeuGlyGluMetGlyGluAlaProAlaProGluGlnTyrLeuValLeuG~uGl~LeuIleAspMet 30 0
* f *
* . A l a A l a *' V a l *
* * t
f
f
*
'Met.
*

901

AACCAGCACCATCTGAATGCCCTCGGCGTGGGCCACGCCTCTCTGGACCAGCTCTGCCAGGTGACCAGGGCCCGCGGACTTCACAGCAAG

f

f

f

f

.

330
AsnGlnHisHisLeuAsnAlaLeuGlyValGlyHisAlaSerLeuA~pGl~LeuCy~GlnValThrArqAlaArqGlyLeuHisSe~Lys
*

991

*

.

.

"

'

*

"

*

*

+

*

"

*

1

*

'

*

,

A

l

=

,

H

~

~

*

~

*

*

*

CTGACTGGCGCAGGCGGTGGTGGCTGTGGCATCACACTCCTCAAGCCAGGGCTGGAGCAGCCAGAAGTGGA~CCACGAAGCAGGCCCTG
360
LeuThrGlyAlaGlyGlyGlyGlyCysGlyIleThrLeuLeuLy~P~oGlyLeuGluGl~ProGl~V~lGluAlaThrLysGlnAlaLeu
* * * * t
I
II
I
t
I
1
L
t
f
II
f
+ArgAlaLys*
+Ala*
.
I
t

1081 ACCAGCTGTGGCTTTGACTGCTTGGAAACCAGCATCGGTGCCCCCGGCGTCTCCATCCACTCAGCCACCTCCCTGGACAGCCGAGTCCAG
ThrSe~CysGlyPheASpCysLeuGluThrSerIleGlyAlaProGlyValSerIleHlsSerAlaTh~SerLeuAspSerAr~ValGln390
* Gly
* * *
Trp * * *
* * *
* * Met
* *
IleGluAspPro
Arq
1111 CAAGCCCTGGATGGCCTCTGAGAGGAGCCCACGACACTGCAGCCCCACCCAGATGCCCCTTTCTGGATTATTCTGGGGGCTGCAGTTCGA
GlnAlaLeuAspGlyLeu...

* . * _ , *

396

1261 CTCTGTGCTGGCCAGCGAGCGCCCAGCTCCTGACACTGCTGGAGAGGCCCCAGCCGCTTGGCGATGCCAGCCAAGCTCTGCAGTCCCAGC
1351 GGTGGGACCTAGGGAGGCATGGTCTGCCCTCTGCATCCTCTGGAGCCAGCCGAGCAGGAGGCCTAGGAGGGTCCTCTGAGACTCCAGACC
1441 TGAGGCGAGAAGGGCTGCTTCCCTGAAGCTCCCACAGTCCCATCTGCTTCAGGCCCCCGCCTTGGCCTGTGTTCTTCCTGGCCGCCTGGG
1531 TCCAATGCTCAGGTGCTGGGGCCTGGTTCCCGGAGAAGTGTGCCTTCTCTCTCCCTTTTCAGGGACGGCCCCCTGTCTCTCAGGGCCAGG
1621 CCTCTCCCTCCTCCAGGAAGCCTTCCCCTACCCCTTGTCGCCCCTCCCTCCCAGAGCACCTGCTGTCTGGGTGGC~CACTCAGCACTTGG
1711 CCCTTCTACCTAGCGGGATGGGGCTCCCCCAGGGGCTGTCCCGGAGGCGGTG~CCTGGTTAAATAAGGCAGTGTGGCCTTGGTTTATA
1801 GCACTTTCTTCCGATCTGTACCTGAGAGGTTTGTGGAAAAGATGGCAAATGGGG~AGATTTTGTGTcAAC(A)n

MeualonateKinasemRNA-To
determinethe size and full-length sequence corresponding to the normalmevalonate
relative levels of mevalonate kinase mRNA, a Northern blot kinase. However, 4 of the 12 cDNA inserts contained a single
was preparedusing poly(A)+RNA isolated fromeither normal base pair substitution in the coding region (nucleotide 902)
fibroblasts or fibroblasts from the mevalonic aciduria index that replaced a n adenine witha cytosine (the remainingclones
case. The size of humanmevalonate kinase mRNA from contained partialsequences only).The effect of this transvernormal and mevalonic aciduria samples (Fig. 5, lanes I and 2, sion was tochangeanasparagine
residue to a threonine
respectively) is -2.0 kb, which is identical to the
size reported residue, which resulted in the elimination of a predicted pfor rat mevalonate kinase mRNA (14). Normalization to the turn in thesecondary structure of the protein (Fig. 6).
Sequence Analysis of Normal Human Genomic DNA and
levels of actin mRNA (lanes 3 and 4)showed that therelative
abundance of mevalonate kinase mRNA was similar in both Fibroblasts from Mevalonic Aciduria Patient-To confirm the
normal and mevalonic aciduria cells. In contrast, mevalonate A to C nucleotide substitution and to ensure that presence
its
kinase activities measured by a radiochemical assay (21) were in thecDNA clones wasnot the resultof an artifactproduced
19.9 and 0.28 pmol/min/mg of protein ( n = 2) in the normal duringconstruction of the MKlT cDNAlibrary, normal
and mevalonic aciduria cells, respectively.
human genomic DNA as well as genomic DNA isolated from
Isolation and D N A Sequence Analysis of Meualonate Kinasefibroblasts from the mevalonic aciduria index case were secDNA Clone from Subject with Mevalonic Aciduria-AcDNA quenced. The 208-bp region surrounding the putative mutalibrary was prepared from mRNA purified from fibroblasts tion was amplified from genomic DNAby PCR, and the
from themevalonic aciduria index case. Twelve cDNA clones nucleotide sequence was determined (Fig. 7). The sequence
(pMKlT1-pMKlT12) were obtained after screening 1 x lo6 obtained from themevalonic aciduria genomic DNA confirms
recombinants with a radiolabeled normal human mevalonate the presence of the missense mutation at nucleotide 902 and
kinase cDNA insert (pHMK101). ThecDNA inserts in these also demonstrates that the patient is a heterozygote for the
clonesranged in size from 880 bpto 2.0 kb. The DNA allele containing the A to C mutation.
Identification of Missense Mutation by Allele-specific Oligosequences were aligned with the normal human mevalonate
kinase cDNA sequence. Two of the cDNA inserts contained nucleotide Hybridization-To determine whether the A to C

*

13233

Identification of a Missense Mutationin Mevalonic Aciduria
REGION A_
KINASE MEV
RAT
KINASE
MEVHUMAN
E . c o l KINASE
i GAL
S. c e r e v i s i a e GALKINASE(GAL
S t r e p t o m y c e s S p . GAL
KINASE
K. marxianus KINASE
GAL
S. c e r e v i s i a e R A R l
S. c e r e v i s i a e GAL3
S. c e r e v i s i a e P-MEV
KINASE

1)

-

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

(1)
(1)
(16)
(41)
( 18
(31)
(1)
(35)
(1)

: (34)
: (34)

GYPATHTI
DAKPDFVA
GR~RGCGR
DSRKFFITR

: (49)

: (74)
: (51)

"HLPFLTS

HVNLILSLG
-@LRAFS

D F S ~ L A I D
DTKYEAFVVGL

:
:
:
:

(64)
(33)
(68)
(33)

- -0- - - - - - A P G R V N L I G E H - D Y - - - - V L - - - - -

CONSENSUS

RAT MEV KINASE
n u w MEV KINASE
E . c o l i GAL KINASE
S. c e r e v i s i a e GAL KINASE (GAL
S t r e p t o m y c e s S p . GAL KINASE
X. marxianus GAL KINASE
S. c e r e v i s i a e R A R l
S. c e r e v i s i a e G A L 3
S. c e r e v i s i a e P - m v KINASE

EgjzK

: (158)
: (158)

: (142)
: (183)

1)

: (142)

: (170)
: (161)
: (176)

: (170)

""_

CONSENSUS

S--P---GLGSSAA--V----A-S

BEGION

C

RAT MEV KINASE
HUMAN MEV KINASE
E . c o l iKINASE
GAL
S. c e r e v i s i a e GALKINASE(GAL
Streptomyces
sp. GAL KINASE
S. c e r e v i s i a e RARl
CONSENSUS

: (323)

1)

: (323)
: (323)
: (456)
: ( 32 3 )

: (341)

AAHGLHSK
RARGLHSK
IGDKGGVR
SNGSYGSR
GLRGPRRR
DLRIGSTK

: (351)

: (351)
: (351)
: (484)
: (351)
: (369)

---------TG-G-GGC---L--------

FIG. 2. Protein sequence conservation found in the three regions of human mevalonate kinase. Shown are the three regions of
in parentheses represent the positions
protein sequence homology, regionsA-C. Amino acids are shown in single letter code, and numbers
the
in the aminoacid sequence for each protein. Amino acids presenta t a given position in 50% or more of the sequences areboxed and shaded,
and the consensus amino acid sequence is shown below each region. MEV, mevalonate; GAL, galactokinase; P-MEV, phosphomevalonate.
The amino acid sequence shown for
Kluyueromyces marxianus represents only a fragmentof the galactokinase.

was spotted onto duplicate BioTransnylon membranes. The
membranes were then hybridizedwith allele-specific endlabeledoligonucleotideprobes to discriminate between the
normal sequence orthe sequence containingthe A to C
HMK
substitution. As shown in Fig. 8, seven different samples of
RMK
normal genomic DNA sampleswere negative for the mutation
in additionto genomicDNA samples fromfour different
EGK
subjects with mevalonic aciduria. However, hybridization of
the oligonucleotide with the mutation to
genomic DNAs from
YGK
the proband (Z. W.) and the proband's father and brother
confirmed the presence of the point mutation in these subSGK
jects, whereas the proband's mother was negative. Hybridization of the oligonucleotidewith the normal sequence to
RARl
genomic DNA from the proband indicated that the
index case
is a compound heterozygote.
YGAL3
Transient Expression of Normal and Mutant Mevalonate
Kinases-Although
themutation identified inthepatient
YPMK
with mevalonicaciduria displayed mendelian inheritance,verrequired expresFIG. 3. Spatial arrangement of three conserved regions of ification of this defect as the causative agent
protein sequence. Regions A-C of conserved protein sequence are sional analysis. To this end, mutant and normalcDNAs were
represented by solid, hatched, and checkered boxes, respectively. T h e inserted into the
expressionvectorpCMV5
and expressed
approximate residue number for each protein is shown at the top.
transiently in COS-7 cells (18). Fig. 9 shows the typical
H M K , human mevalonate kinase;RMK, rat mevalonate kinase;EGK,
enzyme activity and proteinlevels (inset) expressed from the
E. coli galactokinase; YGK, yeast galactokinase; SGK, Streptomyces
galactokinase; RARI, yeastRARlprotein;
YGAW, yeast GALS; two constructs. Usinga polyclonalantibody generated against
Y P M K , yeast phosphomevalonate kinase.
purified ratmevalonatekinase,immunoblotanalysis
was
performed on equivalent amounts of protein from cell lysates
of each transfection. Human mevalonate kinase enzyme acnucleotide substitution was present as a common polymorphism in normal human genomic DNA and whether it was tivity was determined by a radiochemical assay of the same
present in othermevalonic aciduria subjects, a n allele-specific cell lysates. It is clear that whereas each construct expressed
oligonucleotide hybridization screen was employed. The anal- an equal amount of mevalonate kinase protein, the activity
ogous 208-bp region surrounding the mutationwas amplified associatedwith the mevalonicaciduriadefect
was greatly
from genomic DNA by the PCR technique, and the product diminished.Controlandmock-transfected
cells displayed
XESlDCE
hfl

Identification Missense
of a Mutation

13234

in Mevalonic
Aciduria

TABLEI
Segregation of the human mevalonate kinasegene with human chromosome12 in hamster-humansomatic cell hybrids
Hybrid
Clone

507
683
756
904

Mevalonate
kinase **

+
+
+
+

HumanChromosomes *
3

4

"

+

-

"

"

"

"

"

"

1

2

5

6

+

"

+

7

" " _

X

2222
811019181710615141312110
"

"

+

+

+

-

-

+

+

"

"

-

"

"

+ + + " " + + + " " + + + " +
+

+

" " _

+

-

-

-

-

-

-

Y

+ - - +
+ - + + - -

-

-

+ - - +

21 2

324
423
734
750
803
81 1
854
860
862
867
909
937
940
967
968
983
1006
1049
1079
1099

* +, presence of the human chromosome in >45% of the cells; -, absence of the human chromosome.

** +, presence of the mevalonate kinase DNA sequence; -, absence of the mevalonate kinase DNA sequence.

protein. Thethree
nearly undetectable levels of mevalonate kinase protein and to galactokinase andtheyeastRARl
regions of amino acid sequencehomology (regions A-C) (Figs.
activity. Whereas in this particular experiment the mutant
showed a reduction in activity that was -20% that of the 2 and 3) shared
by mevalonate kinase and these other proteins
normal, these values varied between 5 and 20% in five sepa- as well as the conservation
of the relative spatial arrangement
rate experiments. Interestingly, in eachof these experiments, of these regions suggest that these genes may belong to a
a variation in the electrophoreticmobility was noted between common gene family. Mevalonate kinase and galactokinase
the normal and mutantenzymes. This ispossibly a reflection have similar characteristics, even though galactokinase (EC
of the perturbation in proteinsecondary structure caused by 2.7.1.6; ATP:D-galactose 1-phosphotransferase) is anenzyme
the amino acid substitution.
involved in carbohydrate metabolism and catalyzes the phosphorylation of galactose. Both proteins arecytosolic enzymes
DISCUSSION
with similar subunit masses that
utilize ATP asa cofactor for
phosphorylating low molecular weight substrates (mevalonic
Theprotein sequences of humanandratmevalonate
kinases are highly conserved, and there is an 82% sequence acid and galactose). The function of these conserved regions
identity in the amino
acid sequencesof both enzymes. Similar of amino acid sequence is not known, but they may represent
or the nucleoto rat mevalonate kinase, the human enzymedisplays the canonical sequences for either the catalytic site
where X represents any tide-binding site on both enzymes. The yeast RARl protein
motif (G-X-G-X-X-G-X,,-,,-A-X-K,
amino acid) for the ATP-binding siteidentified in the amino shares the sameregions of amino acid sequence homology as
acid sequence of protein kinases (30,31). The
relative position described for mevalonate kinase and galactokinase, but the
gene
of this potential ATP-binding site is also conserved in both identity of the RARl protein is unknown. The RARl
screening for mutations that increase the
human and rat mevalonate kinases. Currently, it is unknown wasisolatedby
mitotic stability of plasmids whose replication is dependent
whether this putative ATP-binding site on mevalonate kinase
is functional.
on weak origins of DNA replication (autonomously replicating
Mevalonate kinase also displays
protein sequence homology sequence elements).

Identification of a Missense Mutation in Mevalonic Aciduria

1323.5

Mevalonic Aciduria

Normal
t

"
"

,"n_

-7,

-

-

I

Kb 23.1

9.4-

6.64.42 9 02 9 42 9 0

302

306

Rerldue Number

2.0-

FIG.4. Southern blot analysis of genomic DNAs from normal and mevalonic aciduria subjects. Genomic DNAs isolated
from normal and mevalonic aciduria fihroblasts were digested with
the indicated restrictionendonucleases.Southernblots
were prepared, and the nitrocellulose memhranes were hybridized to radiolabeledprobes corresponding totheentirecodingsequence
of the
humanmevalonatekinasecDNA.
The position of molecularsize
standards are shown to theleft.

1

Kb

2 3

2-

w

1-

4
I

"""_

" "_

"

2 9 82 9 42 9 0

4.40

-

2.371.35-

0.24-

302

306

Rerldue Number

FIG. 6. &Turn probability determination for normal mevdonate kinase and mevalonic aciduria mevalonate
kina.
The deduced amino acid sequences for normal mevalonate kinase and
mevalonic aciduria mevalonate kinase were analyzed hv the ChouFasman algorithm for &turn prohahility. Mevalonic aciduria rnevalonate kinase differs by a single bane pair suhstitution at nucleotide
902 (residue 301) in the coding region. resulting in an asparagine to
threonine substitution.

the pyrophosphorylation of 5-phosphomevalonate to mevalonate 5-pyrophosphate. This product
is used in the synthesis
of a variety of essential compounds including sterols, dolichols, and ubiquinone. The GAL3 gene is required for rapid
FIG.5. RNA blot analysis of levels of mevalonate kinase
mRNA in normal and mevalonic aciduria fibroblasts.
RNA induction of the galactose-melibiose regulon genes in Staphblots were prepared using poly(A)' RNA purified from either normal ylococcus cereukiae. The amino acid sequence of the GAL3
human fibroblasts (lanes I and 3 ) or fibrohlasts from the mevalonic protein is similar to thesequences of yeast and E. coli galacaciduria patient ([anes2 and 4 ) . The nitrocellulose membranes were tokinases, but the GAL3 protein does not exhibit galactokihybridized to a 539-bp radiolabeled fragment from the 3"untransnaseactivity (28, 32). Aminoacidsequence
homology in
lated region of the full-length human mevalonate kinase
cDNA clone,
regions
A
and
B
indicates
that
the
GAL3
and
phosphomevapHMKlOl (lanes 1 and 2). The RNA blot was stripped and rehyhridlonate kinase proteins may be related to the gene family of
(lanes 3 and 4 ) . The relative positions of
ized to an actin probe
molecular size standards are shown to the
left. The mevalonate kinase mevalonate kinase, galactokinase, and the RARl protein.For
activities in normal and mevalonic aciduria fibroblasts were 19.9 and clarity, we propose to name this new family of genes the
0.28 pmol/min/mg of protein, respectively.
mevalonate kinase gene family.
Isolation of a cDNA clone coding for human mevalonate
Two other proteins that only contain amino
acid sequence kinase allowed us to determine the chromosomallocalization
homology to regions Aand B (Fig. 2) are the proteins encoded of the mevalonate kinase gene and to characterize the mutaby the yeastGAL3 gene (28) and the yeast phosphomevalon- tion in the genetic disease mevalonic aciduria. Results from
ate kinase gene (29). The locations of regions A and B in the Southern hybridization analysis using genomic DNA either
GAL3 and phosphomevalonate kinase proteins are similar to from normal subjects orfrom hamster-human hybrid cell lines
those observed in mevalonate kinase, galactokinase, and the indicated that mevalonate kinase
is a single copy gene located
RARlprotein.Phosphomevalonatekinaseisanessential
on chromosome 12. The chromosomal locations of only two
otherenzymes
(3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoAsynthase
enzyme in the yeast sterol biosynthetic pathway that catalyzes

Identification
Missense
a of
Mutation
Mevalonic
in Aciduria

13236

A

(;

C

‘I’
A

b

A/C

C
C
A
G
h

NORMAI,

_tacracataaaacctta~cctcaggcaggccaagtggga~cagatggaaccttctccccta~~~TTGACAT
886

*

GAACCAGCACCATCTGAATGCCCTCGGCGTGGGCCACGCCTCTCTGGACCAGCTCTGCCAGGTGACCAGGGCCCG
906

326

966

946

CGGACTTCACAGCAAGCTGACTGGCGCAGGCGGTGGTGGC~TGGC~TCCTC
1006

986

1026

FIG. 7. Nucleotide sequence of genomic DNA from patient with mevalonic aciduria. Genomic DNA from either normal human
( M E V . ) aciduriapatient (Z.W.) wasamplified by PCR, and the nucleotide sequence was
fibroblasts or fibroblasts fromamevalonic
determined. Upper, a portion of the autoradiograph is shown for the sequences from hp 899 to 910, reading in a 5’ to 3‘ direction from the
t.op of the gel, of the normal DNA and of the patient’s DNA. The heterozygous state of the patient’s DNA is shown at the arrowhead. with
one normal allele and one allele containing the A to C nucleotide substitution. Lower, the site of the mutation in reference to the gene
structure is shown. The intron-exon junction immediately 5’ of the SacI site was determined by comparison to the cDNA sequence and the
identification of a consensus splice site. The intron sequence is shown in lower-case letters, and the exon sequence is shown in uppr-case
letters. Numbering is based on the cDNA sequence. The SacI site is boxed. The 5’- and 3’-PCR primers used to amplify this region are
underlined, and the position of the missense mutation is indicated by an asterisk.

the regional mapping of human mevalonate kinase on chromosome 12.
ALLELE
NORMAL
s
0
b
I
0
0
Mevalonic aciduria is postulated tobe caused by a mutation
in the gene coding for mevalonate kinase. This hypothesis
MEV. ACIDURIA
was based on the observation that there
is a marked reduction
ALLELE
in mevalonate kinase activityin cells from mevalonicaciduria
subjects, and there is a large increase in the levels of mevalonate in the serum and urine of these subjects. These data
areconsistentwithhaving
a mutation in themevalonate
9
10
I1
1;’
13
14
15
16
kinase gene, but they are notconclusive. By isolating a cDNA
NORMAL ALLELE
b
*
.
@
e
*
‘
m
clone coding for human mevalonate kinase, we were able to
identify a missense mutation in the mevalonate kinase gene
MEV. ACIDUAIA
from a subject with mevalonic aciduria. The missense mutaALLELE
tion changed the protein sequence of mevalonate kinase by
FIG. 8. Identification of mevalonic aciduria mutation by replacing an asparagine residue with a threonine. This suballele-specific hybridization. Genomic DNAs were isolated from
stitution caused a significant alteration in the predicted seccontrol lymphoblasts and fibroblasts
as well as fibroblasts froma
number of mevalonic aciduria patients, including the patient(Z.W.) ondary structure of the enzyme. Analysis of the protein seand the patient’s mother, father, and brother. region
The surrounding quence of mevalonate kinase using the Chou-Fasman algothe A to C nucleotide suhstitution was amplified by PCR, and the
rithm indicated that this amino acid substitution eliminated
product was spotted onto duplicatefilters. The filters were hybridized
a @-turnin the secondary structure
of the enzyme. The marked
either to anoligonucleotide corresponding to the normal sequencein
effect
of
this
amino
acid
substitution
on protein structure
the region of the A to C change (normalallele) or to anoligonucleotide
may explain theloss of mevalonate kinase activityassociated
from the same region incorporating the A to C change (mevalonic
( M E V . ) aciduria allele). Lane 1, humanmevalonatekinaseclone
with this geneticdisease. The transfection studies support
DNA; lanes 2 and 3, purchased normal human genomic DNA; lanes this conclusion. COS-7 cells transfected with the mutant
4-8, normal genomic DNA from control fibrohlasts/lymphoblasts;
cDNA construct exhibited a severe reduction in the level of
lane 9,patient Z.W.; lane IO, Z.W.’s mother; lane 11, Z.W.’s father;
mevalonatekinaseactivity
when comparedtothenormal
lane 12. Z. W.’s brother; lanes 13-16, fourindividualmevalonic
expression construct,even though equivalent amounts
of proaciduria patients.
tein were produced from the two vectors. Thus, the missense
mutationresultedin a substantialinactivation of enzyme
and reductase) in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway are
activity.
known, and both genes are located on human chromosome 5
This mutationwas identified inthe DNA sequences of both
(33-36). In situ hybridization studies areneeded to determine a cDNA clone and a PCR-amplified region of genomic DNAs
1

7

3

4

5

6

7

8

IdentificationMissense
of a Mutation
Mevalonic
in Aciduria

1

T

\IC\

,\c l c l u r l . 1

1.7237

\ o r n u 1 \lh

\',x 11jr

L f i t r ~ n 1~$ , (r1 ~ ~ ~

FIG.9. Transient expression of mutant and normal meValonate kinases in COS-7 cells. Expression constructs containing either
normal (normalM K ) or mutant ( M e u Aciduria, MA) mevalonate kinasewere transfected intoCOS-; cells and expressed for4 0 h. Cell lysates
were analyzed for enzyme activity by a radiochemical assay (histogram) and for mevalonate kinase expressional levels hy immunohlotting
(inset). Equivalent amounts of protein were used from each sample in both the enzyme assay (21) p g ) and in each lane of the SI)S gel ( : ( 0 1 )
p a ) . Molecular

mass standards ( S T D )are indicated to the left of the autoradiograph.

from the proband and the proband's father and brother. The diseasemevalonic aciduria,and this is thefirst identified
missense mutation does not represent a common gene poly- mutation in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway in humans.
morphism because it was not found in genomic DNA samples Moreover, the fact that the missense mutation identified in
from seven normal subjects and from four other subjects
with our study was not detected in the prohand's mother as well
as four other subjects with mevalonic aciduria indicates that
mevalonic aciduria. Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridizahe caused hy different types of
tion studies indicated that the proband inherited this muta- this geneticdiseasemay
tion from the father and that the index case is a compound mutations in the gene coding for mevalonate kinase.
heterozygote. The absence of the missense mutation in the
Acknowledgments-We thank Drs. Gordon Rohinson. Todd Kirrhfour other mevalonic aciduria subjects suggests that this genetic disease may be caused by a variety of mutations in the gessner, and RichardCregg for useful discussions. Excellent technical
assistance was provided hv Bernadette Kienzle.
mevalonate kinase gene.
A genetic defect in the proband's mother has not yet been
REFERENCES
identified. Twofull-length cDNA clones isolated from the
1. Brown. M. S.. and Goldstein. -1. I,. (19ROIJ . 1.i id Rrs 21, 505-517
2. Tanaka. R. D.. Schafer. H. I... Lee. I,. Y..Freucfhwrrer. .I. 5 . . nnd 5!oslev.
mevalonic aciduria cDNAlibrary contained the normal coding
sequence for mevalonate kinase; and based on results from
allele-specific oligonucleotidehybridization, this normal
DNA
sequence was inherited from the proband's mother. The presence of a normal coding sequence formevalonate kinase seems
incompatible with the marked reduction
in mevalonate kinase
activity measured in the proband and, to a lesser degree, in
the proband's mother. However, both of the cDNA clones
with the normal coding sequence for mevalonate kinase did
not contain the complete 5"untranslated region. Therefore,
i t is possible that a mutation in the 5"untranslated region of
the mevalonate kinase mRNA may inhibit translation. It is
unlikely that this allele contains a mutation that alters gene
transcription since cells from the proband contained normal
levels of mevalonatekinasemRNA
(Fig. 5 ) . T o date,the
molecular basis for the mevalonate kinase deficiency in the
proband's mother is not known, and additional studies are
needed to determine the completenucleotide sequence of the
5"untranslated region for the mevalonate kinasemRNA.
Our study provides the first evidence that a mutation in
the gene coding for mevalonate kinase can cause the genetic

13238

Identification Missense
of a Mutation

19. Smith, L. M., Sanders, J. Z., Kaiser, R. J., Hughes, P., Dodd, C., Connell,
C. R., Heiner, C., Kent, S. B. H., and Hood, L. E. (1986) Nature 3 2 1 ,
674-679
20. Bradford, M. M. (1976) Anal. Biochem. 7 2 , 248-254
M. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 2 6 2 , 1996-2004
21. Faust,J.,andKrieger,
22. Kyte, J., and Doolittle, R. F. (1982) J. Mol. Biol. 1 5 7 , 105-132
23. Debouck, C., Riccio, A,, Schumperli, D., McKenny, K., Jeffers, J., Hughes,
C., Rosenberg, M., Heusterspreute,M.,Brunel, F., andDavison, J. (1985)
Nuclerc
Acrds
Res. 13, 1841-1853
24. Citron, B. A,, and Donelson, J. E.(1984) J . Bacteriol. 1 5 8 , 269-278
25. Webster, T. D., and Dickson, R. C. (1988) Nucleic Acids Res. 1 6 , 81928194
26. Adarns, C. W., Fornwald, J. A,, Schmidt, F. J., Rosenberg, M., and Brawner,
E.
M. (1988) J. Bacteriol. 170,203-212
27. Kearsey, S. E., andEdwards, J. (1987) Mol. Gen. Genet. 210,509-517

in Mevalonic
Aciduria
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

Bhat, P. J., Oh, D., and Hopper, J. E. (1990) Genetics 125,281-291
Tsay, Y. H., and Robinson, G. W. (1991) Mol. Cell. Biol. 11,620-631
Hanks, S. K., Quinn, A. M., and Hunter, T.(1988) Science 241,42-52
Argos, P., and
Leberman, R. (1985) Eur. J. Biochem. 152,651-656
Bajwa, W., Torchia, T. E.,and Hopper, J. E. (1988) Mol. Cell. Biol. 8 ,
3439-3447
Lindgren, V., Luskey, K. L., Russel, D. W., and Francke, U. (1985) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. (I. S . A. 82,8567-8571
Mohandas, R., Heinzmann, C., Sparkes,
R.
S., Wasrnuth,
Edwards,
J.,
P.
A,, and Lusis, A. J. (1986) Somatic Cell Mol. Genet. 1 2 , 89-94
Mehrabian, M., Callaway, K. A., Clarke, C.F., Tanaka, R. D., Greenspan,
M., Sparkes,
Lusis,
Fogelrnan,
A. J., J., Edmond,
R. S.,T.,
Mohandas,
A. M., and Edwards, P. A. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. 2 6 1 , 16249-16255
Leonard, S., Arbogast, D., Geyer,
Jones,
D.,
C., and
Sinensky,
M. (1986)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 83,2187-2189

