Sporadic Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Due to De Novo Myosin Mutations
Hugh Watkins,** Ludwig Thierfelder, * Dar-San Hwang,* William McKenna,t J. G. Seidman,11' and C. E. Seidman *

*Cardiology Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115; tDepartment of
Cardiological Sciences, St. George's Hospital Medical School, London SW] 7 ORE, United Kingdom; IDivision of Cardiology,
Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; tDepartment of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115; and 'Howard Hughes Medical Inst., Boston, Massachusetts 02115

Abstract
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs as an autosomal dominant familial disorder or as a sporadic disease without familial
involvement. While missense mutations in the ft cardiac myosin
heavy chain (MHC) gene account for approximately half of all
cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the molecular
causes of sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are unknown.
To determine whether ft cardiac MHC mutations are also associated with sporadic disease, we screened this gene in seven
individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Mutations in the ft cardiac MHC genes were identified in two probands with sporadic disease. In that their parents were neither
clinically nor genetically affected, we conclude that mutations
in each proband arose de novo. Transmission of the mutation
and disease to an offspring occurred in one pedigree, predicting
that these are germline mutations. The demonstration of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy arising within a pedigree coincident
with the appearance of a de novo mutation provides compelling
genetic evidence that ft cardiac MHC mutations cause this disease. We suggest that de novo mutations account for some instances of sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and that
these mutations can be transmitted to children. The clinical
benefits of defining mutations responsible for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should also be available to some patients with sporadic disease. (J. Clin. Invest. 1992. 90:16661671.) Key words: cardiac hypertrophy * myosin heavy chain
gene - RNase protection

Introduction
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is defined as a primary myocardial disorder (1, 2), characterized by increased ventricular
mass with myocyte and myofibrillar disarray (3, 4), that occurs
in the absence of other cardiac or systemic disorders. The diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is based upon the demonstration of unexplained ventricular hypertrophy. Hypertrophy is typically asymmetric, involving the septum and left
ventricular free wall (5-7), but may be concentric or confined
to the distal left ventricle and/or right ventricle (8-10). The
familial form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is inherited as
Address reprint requests to Dr. Seidman, Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115.
Received for publication 24 March 1992 and in revised form 10
June 1992.

an autosomal dominant trait (5, 11-14). Thus, individuals
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy frequently have
multiple affected relatives, and must have one affected parent.
Sporadic occurrence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is defined by similar anatomical and clinical features in an individual whose parents do not have the condition (6, 15).
Estimation of the fraction of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
that occurs as sporadic disease has been difficult. Two studies
using two-dimensional echocardiography in families of probands with at least three available first degree relatives suggested that hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was sporadic in 44%
( 16) and 33% (17). However, clinical studies tend to overestimate the proportion of sporadic disease for several reasons.
First, the severity and distribution of hypertrophy vary considerably, even between related family members, hence assignment of disease status may be inaccurate. Second, there are
difficulties of ascertainment in retrospective studies where family members, especially parents, may be deceased or unavailable for study. Third, many of the families studied are too small
for familial disease to manifest. For these reasons affected relatives may not be identified, with the result that the disease is
assumed to be sporadic.
We have previously identified j3 cardiac myosin heavy
chain (MHC)' mutations that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in about 50% of unrelated families with this disorder ( 18-21 ). Seven different mutations have been identified;
all are missense mutations affecting conserved residues in the
amino-terminal half of the myosin heavy chain. Knowledge of
the particular 3 cardiac MHC gene mutation in a family with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is of clinical importance, in
terms of both diagnosis (20) and prognosis (21 ).
To investigate the molecular basis of sporadic hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy we screened the ,3 cardiac MHC genes of
seven unrelated probands with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Diagnosis was based on the presence of typical clinical features of the disease in the proband and the absence of
disease criteria in both parents. We demonstrate that two of
these probands have /3 cardiac MHC mutations that are comparable to those found in patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Genetic analyses of the probands' parents reveal
that both mutations have arisen de novo, coincident with the
appearance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Methods
Clinical evaluation. After informed consent was obtained in accordance with the Brigham and Women's Hospital Committee for the

J. Clin. Invest.
3 The American Society for Clinical Investigation, Inc.

0021-9738/92/11/1666/06 $2.00
Volume 90, November 1992, 1666-1671
1666

Watkins et al.

1. Abbreviations used in this paper: MHC, myosin heavy chain; STR,
short tandem repeat (sequence).

Protection of Human Subjects from Research Risks, blood was drawn
from probands and their first-degree relatives. Clinical, electrocardiographic, and echocardiographic assessments were performed as described previously (22). The diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was based on the demonstration of unexplained left, right or biventricular hypertrophy. An individual was diagnosed with sporadic
disease if both parents were available for study and lacked criteria for
diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Detection ofmutations. The techniques used to screen the ft cardiac
MHC gene coding sequence for mutations have been described in detail elsewhere (20, 21 ). The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used
to amplify # cardiac MHC gene or mRNA sequences from affected
individuals' Epstein-Barr virus transformed lymphocytes. Both normal
and mutationally altered ft cardiac MHC mRNA was detected by two
rounds of PCR amplification. Amplified sequences were hybridized to
RNA probes transcribed from a normal gene and RNase A protection
assays performed as described previously (20, 21 ). The entire # cardiac
MHC coding sequence was examined in all probands, using both sense
and antisense riboprobes.
Amplified DNAs that yielded abnormal RNase cleavage patterns
were reanalyzed with new DNA isolates to exclude artifacts arising
from PCR, and then subjected to dideoxy nucleotide sequence analysis. Where possible, the nucleotide change identified by sequencing was
independently confirmed by demonstration of a predicted change in
restriction enzyme site. Amino acid sequences were deduced from
DNA sequences.
Genetic analysis offamilies. When a mutation was identified in a
proband with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy its presence was
sought in first-degree relatives by either RNase protection assays or
restriction enzyme digestion. Paternity was confirmed by demonstration of inheritance of appropriate alleles at eight polymorphic dimeric
short tandem repeat sequences (STRs): APOAII, APOCII, ASS,
DIS103, DlSl 16, GCG, INT2, and PLA2 (23-29), using PCR conditions as described previously with end-labeled forward primers (23).
Allele frequencies were calculated from a panel of 22 unrelated probands. The parental origin and subsequent inheritance of chromosomes bearing the de novo mutations in the probands was assessed by
analysis ofinheritance of alleles at polymorphisms within the # cardiac
MHC gene: dimeric STRs in the 5' untranslated region (30) and in
intron 24 ( 31 ) and the restriction fragment length polymorphism identified by probe pSC14 (32).

Results
Seven unrelated probands with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were identified; all had typical features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with maximum left ventricular wall
thickness ranging from 1.8 to 4.0 cm (median 3.0 cm). The ,3
cardiac MHC gene was analyzed in each proband, using the
RNase protection assay. ,3 cardiac MHC gene mutations were
found in two of these probands, designated H and AR.
Clinical analyses
Family H. Individual 11-2 in family H was diagnosed with hy-

pertrophic cardiomyopathy because of typical clinical features
(Table I and Fig. 1 ). The proband's father (I-1 ) has a 10-year
history of treatment for essential hypertension and symptomatic ischemic heart disease and underwent open heart surgery
in 1974 for excision of a left atrial myxoma. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed atrial flutter with minor repolarization
changes; a two-dimensional echocardiogram demonstrated a
dilated left atrium (6 cm) and a mildly dilated poorly contracting left ventricle without hypertrophy. Based on the absence of
typical features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and the presence of known cardiovascular disease, individual I- 1 was diagnosed as unaffected by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Clinical

analyses of the proband's mother (1-2) were entirely normal.
Individuals 1-1 and 1-2 had not been studied previously. Previous analyses of the proband's children had identified one
affected individual, III-2 (21 ). All other members of the family
have an entirely normal clinical examination, EKG and echocardiogram.
Family AR. Individual 11-1 in family AR also has typical
clinical features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, with marked
asymmetric septal hypertrophy and systolic anterior motion of
the mitral valve (Table I). The proband's father, individual I- 1,
had a past medical history of myocardial infarction in 1979. A
12-lead electrocardiogram showed anteroseptal Q waves; there
were no features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on two-dimensional echocardiogram. Clinical studies of all other first

Table I. Clinical Features ofAffected Individuals and Their Parents in Families H and AR
Clinical symptoms

Subject

Age/Sex

Chest pain

Dyspnea

Syncope

Electrocardiogram*
BBB

ABN Q

2-D echocardiogramt

LVH +/-ST

MAX LVWT

RVH

SAM

mm

HI-If
HI-2
H II-2
H III-2
AR I-l"1
AR I-2

ARII-1

73M
70F
44F
24 F
70 M
63 F
40F

+

+

+

I
I
III
II
I
I
I

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

L
-

+

-

-

+
+

+

-

+

14

9
18
28
11
10
38

LA SIZE
mm

-

-

+

++

-

+

60
32
50
42
30
40
38

*
Electrocardiographic abnormalities included bundle branch block (BBB; L, left), abnormal Q waves (ABN Q), and left ventricular hypertrophy
with or without associated ST changes (LVH +/- ST).
$ Echocardiographic findings included maximum left ventricular wall thickness (MAX LVWT), right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH), systolic
anterior motion of the mitral valve (SAM; + incomplete, ++ complete), and left atrial size (LA SIZE).
9Electrocardiogram showed atrial flutter with repolarization changes (see text).
"Electrocardiogram showed anteroseptal Q waves due to previous myocardial infarction.

Sporadic Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Due to De Novo Myosin Mutations

1667

1-2

II-1

Figure 1. Echocardiograms of
members of family H. Short-axis 2D echocardiogram views taken at
the level of the mitral valve leaflets
are shown with a schematic illustrating the anatomical structures visualized (LV, left ventricle; MV,
mitral valve; IVS, interventricular
septum; RV, right ventricle). LV
wall thickness is normal in individuals I- 1, I-2, and II- 1 and abnormal
in individuals 11-2 and III-2.

degree relatives, including the proband's mother and children,
were entirely normal.

Genetic analyses
Family H. A f3 cardiac myosin heavy chain gene mutation in
the proband of family H was detected previously (21 ). This G
to A transition in exon 23 (designated Glu924Lys) encodes a
lysine residue rather than a glutamic acid residue at position

924 (numbered according to reference 30). The nucleotide
substitution, as detected by an RNase protection assay of DNA
amplified from exon 23 (Fig. 2), is present in both the proband
(II-2) and her daughter (III-2), but neither parent. This result
was confirmed by repeat analysis of independent samples from
each family member. This mutation does not result in any
change in restriction enzyme site.
1668

Watkins ei al.

Two possible explanations exist for the finding that neither
parent bears the mutation present in the proband. Either the
mutation has arisen de novo, or else has been inherited from a
father other than individual I- 1. To determine if individual I- 1
was the biological father of individuals 11-1 and II-2 we have
characterized the alleles found in father (I-I), mother (1-2),
son (II-1), and daughter (II-2) at eight polymorphic STRs
spread throughout the genome (Methods). At each locus the
children have inherited alleles present in the father's genome,
rather than other alleles that exist in the general population
(Fig. 3 and data not shown). From the frequency of the inherited alleles in the population we have calculated that the
odds that a particular individual, chosen at random from the
population, would have been able to produce the alleles found
in individuals II-I or II-2 are < 1 in 100,000. We conclude that

243

152

abnormality on RNase protection. Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed this to be due to a C to T transition in exon 20
(affecting nucleotide residue 2253, numbered according to reference 33). This substitution encodes a change from the normal arginine amino acid residue to a cysteine in the mutant
polypeptide, and is designated Arg723Cys. Arginine residue
723 is conserved among all known cardiac MHC's and all vertebrate striated muscle MHC's except the human perinatal and
rabbit skeletal isoforms (34); mutation to a cysteine residue
constitutes a nonconservative substitution with a change in net
charge. This missense mutation, which is highly analogous to
those others previously described, has not been seen in analyses
of more than 180 normal chromosomes.
The nucleotide substitution involved in the Arg723Cys
mutation is predicted to abolish a BcgI restriction enzyme site
present in the normal cDNA sequence. Digestion of amplified
cDNA sequences with this enzyme (Fig. 4) confirms the presence of the mutation in individual II- 1 and also confirms that
all other members of the family are genetically unaffected. The
paternal relationship of individual 1-1 to 11-1 was confirmed
with the eight polymorphic markers, providing odds of greater
than 100,000 to 1 in favor of paternity. The , cardiac MHC
gene polymorphisms were not sufficiently informative in family AR to determine the parental origin of the chromosome
that acquired the Arg723Cys mutation.

bp

bp

91 bp -*o

IW

Discussion

'0

Figure 2. Detection of the Glu924Lys mutation in exon 23 in
members of family H by RNase protection assay. The pedigree is
shown above. Squares denote males and circles denote females; solid
symbols denote those clinically affected and open symbols denote
those unaffected. Below is an RNase protection assay of exon 23 DNA
from each individual, in corresponding positions to those of the pedigree. Amplified DNA is hybridized to a 32P-labeled RNA probe of
normal ,B MHC sequence which is then digested with RNase A, resulting in cleavage at mismatched bases. The normal exon protects
a 243 base fragment (arrow); the Glu924Lys mutation results in
cleavage of this to fragments of 91 and 152 bases (arrows). Cleavage
due to the nucleotide mismatch is present only in the clinically affected individuals 11-2 and III-2.

individual I-1 is the biological father of both the proband and
her unaffected brother.
The parental origin of the chromosome bearing the de novo
mutation was assessed by haplotype analysis of the 13 cardiac
MHC gene. Polymorphisms in a dimeric STR present in the 5'
untranslated region (methods) demonstrate that the chromosome bearing the Glu924Lys mutation in the proband (II-2)
was inherited from the father (I- I). This chromosome, which
bears a normal copy of the 13 cardiac MHC gene in the father, is
also inherited in its normal state by an unaffected son (II-1 )
(data not shown). Thus this normal chromosome is associated
with absence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in individuals
I- 1 and II- 1, but once carrying the new Glu924Lys mutation is
associated with the appearance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in individuals II-2 and 111-2.
Family AR. Screening the 13 cardiac MHC gene cDNA sequence in the proband of family AR (11-1) identified a novel

These analyses identify two examples of missense mutations in
the : cardiac MHC genes of individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy whose parents are clinically and genetically unaffected. We speculate that the 1 cardiac MHC gene mutations in
both probands arose in a germline cell as these mutations are
expressed in cells ofdifferent lineages, including myocytes and
peripheral leukocytes, as well as ovarian germ cells in the proband of family H. Collectively, these data suggest that sporadic
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can result from new mutations
that may then be inherited. In one family studied (AR), the
affected proband is typical of cases of sporadic hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and no first-degree relatives are clinically or
genetically affected. However because there is only a 50%
chance that a given chromosome will be inherited by each
child, the probability of a new mutation appearing in the subsequent generation is determined by the number of offspring.
Documentation of germline mutations is frequently difficult in
families of small size. Analyses of the H family demonstrated a
de novo 13 cardiac MHC gene mutation that is inherited; analyses of generations I and II identify sporadic disease while studies of generations II and III demonstrate a familial pattern. We
conclude that de novo 13 cardiac MHC gene mutations can
cause sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; in at least some
instances, these new mutations contribute to the incidence of
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
The demonstration of de novo germline mutations in the 13
cardiac MHC gene in individuals with sporadic disease is important in confirming that these mutations are directly responsible for producing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In families
that coinherit hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and abnormalities ofthe MHC gene, the possibility exists that these abnormalities are merely linked to an unknown gene that is itself responsible for the phenotype. The evidence against this, although very

Sporadic Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Due to De Novo Myosin Mutations

1669

I- I- IIPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP1 2 1

I
2

.1

2

-3
---

4
6

6

7/

7
7 8

8/

Figure 3. Example of STR sequence polymorphism used to confirm paternity. Alleles were typed by PCR amplification of a dimeric STR present
in the APOC2 gene in 22 unrelated individuals and in family H members. The proband (II-1) inherits allele 8 from her mother (1-2) and therefore must inherit allele 9 from her father. This allele is present in individual I- 1, and occurs in 10 of44 alleles present in the unrelated probands ( P ) .

strong, is circumstantial: mutations have not been seen in unaffected individuals; mutations segregate concordant with disease status in large families; mutations affect conserved amino
acid residues, frequently altering the charge (21 ). The evidence
in families H and AR of a normal gene in unaffected individuals acquiring a de novo mutation in individuals who develop
sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy cannot be explained by
such a chance association.

I

II

bb | |~ P

*1

III

_

2

>;

En

bp --'w
320 bp-*
150 bp-*

500

Figure 4. Detection of the Arg723Cys mutation in members of family
AR by BcgI restriction enzyme digestion of PCR amplified cDNA.
The pedigree is shown above, with symbols as for Fig. 2. A 500 base-

pair ,B cardiac MHC cDNA is amplified as previously described, using
primers numbered 1925 and 2424 (21 ). Digestion of a product of
normal sequence generates fragments of 320 and 150 bp (arrows).
The sample from individual II- 1 contains these fragments but also
the 500 base-pair fragment (arrow), because the Arg723Cys mutation
abolishes the BcgI site on the affected chromosome. This mutation
is not present in any other family member.

1670

Watkins et al.

Because of the difficulties in clinically defining sporadic

cases we are not able to determine the precise proportion of all

sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that is caused by de
novo mutations in the j3 cardiac MHC gene. The finding of the
two de novo mutations among the seven probands studied provides an estimate of the frequency of myosin mutations as a
cause sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It appears that
mutations in other genes can cause sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with an identical phenotype. It seems likely that
other loci, as yet unknown, that cause familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy will be candidates for de novo mutations that
cause sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Alternatively, sporadic cases may occur through etiologically distinct mechanisms. Somatic mutations in the fi cardiac
MHC gene occurring during embryogenesis that affect the
heart progenitor cells but not the germline might be a cause of
sporadic disease. Given that such somatic mutations would be
unlikely to be expressed in peripheral leukocytes, these would
not be detected by the techniques used in this study. Undefined
environmental factors might similarly cause a hypertrophic
phenotype and contribute to the incidence of sporadic disease.
The finding of de novo mutations in the j3 cardiac MHC
gene in individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has clinical implications. A genetic diagnosis based on demonstration of a myosin heavy chain mutation should assist in
difficult diagnoses. The problems of establishing the clinical
diagnosis in individual H 1-1 highlight this issue. Co-existing
heart disease, especially hypertension, commonly confounds
interpretation of clinical studies, and may prevent the diagnosis, or exclusion, of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The findings presented here suggest that the benefits of molecular genetic analysis of the ,3 cardiac MHC gene can be extended to a
proportion of cases of sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
We have previously shown that particular mutations specifically influence survival in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, with nonconservative amino acid substitutions being associated with a worse prognosis (21 ). In the absence of a family
history to predict prognosis, the value of defining the diseasecausing mutation as a prognostic indicator will be especially

great in sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Moreover, if
an individual was not clinically recognized as having sporadic
disease the impression of a benign family history may have led
to an inappropriate assumption of low risk status.
Genetic counseling for individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has not been previously feasible in the
absence of an understanding of the etiology of the condition.
On the assumption that sporadic disease was a separate, and
perhaps nongenetic entity, the risk oftransmission to offspring
may have been considered low. Whereas individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by de novo germline mutations in the f# cardiac MHC gene will transmit the
disease gene to 50% of offspring. Once a f# cardiac MHC mutation has been identified in a proband, with either sporadic or
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the possibility exists of
prenatal diagnosis or preclinical diagnosis in children.
We conclude that sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is
within the spectrum of familial disease. De novo f3 cardiac
MHC gene mutations in germline cells contribute to the incidence of both the sporadic and familial variants of this disorder. Genetic analyses of sporadic cases of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can help to confirm diagnoses and provide important genetic information to physicians and affected
individuals.

Acknowledaments
These studies would not have been possible without the invaluable
assistance of family members. We are grateful to Annie O'Donoghue
and Shaughan Dickie for assembling data on family members and to
Mohammad Miri and Tatjana Levi for technical assistance.
This work was supported by grants from the British Heart Foundation (Drs. Watkins and McKenna; Dr. Watkins is the recipient of a
British Heart Foundation Clinical Scientist Fellowship), Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (Dr. Thierfelder), National Institutes of
Health (HL-46320 to Dr. J. G. Seidman; HL-4 1474 and HL-42467 to
Dr. C. E. Seidman), Howard Hughes Medical Foundation (Dr. J. G.
Seidman), the American Heart Association (Dr. C. E. Seidman) and
Bristol Myers Squibb company.

References
1. Maron, B. J., and S. E. Epstein. 1979. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a
discussion of nomenclature. Am. J. Cardiol. 43:1242-1244.
2. Report of the WHO/ISFC task force on the definition and classification of
cardiomyopathies. 1980. Br. Heart J. 44:672-673.
3. Ferrans, V. J., A. G. Morrow, and W. C. Roberts. 1972. Myocardial ultrastructure in idiopathic subaortic stenosis. A study of operatively excised left ventricular outflow tract muscle in 14 patients. Circulation. 45:769-792.
4. Davies, M. J. 1984. The current status of myocardial disarray in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Br. Heart J. 51:361-363.
5. Hollman, A., J. F. Goodwin, D. Teare, and J. W. Renwick. 1960. A family
with obstructive cardiomyopathy (asymmetrical hypertrophy). Br. Heart J.
22:449-456.
6. Frank, S., and E. Braunwald. 1968. Idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis: clinical analysis of 126 patients with emphasis on natural history. Circulation.
37:759-788.
7. Henry, W. L., C. E. Clark, and S. E. Epstein. 1973. Asymmetric septal
hypertrophy (ASH): echocardiographic identification ofthe pathognomonic anatomical abnormality of IHSS. Circulation. 47:225-233.
8. Maron, B. J., J. S. Gottdiener, and S. E. Epstein. 1981. Patterns and significance of distribution of left ventricular hypertrophy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a wide angle, two dimensional echocardiographic study of 125 patients. Am.
J. Cardiol. 48:418-428.
9. Shapiro, L., and W. J. McKenna. 1983. Distribution of left ventricular
hypertrophy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a two-dimensional echocardiographic study. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2:437-444.
10. McKenna, W. J., A. Kleinebenne, P. Nihoyannopoulos, and R. Foale.
1988. Echocardiographic measurement of right ventricular wall thickness in hy-

pertrophic cardiomyopathy: relation to clinical and prognostic features. J. Am.
Coll. Cardiol. 11:351-358.
11. Pare, J. A. P., R. G. Fraser, W. J. Pirozynski, J. A. Shanks, and D. Stubington. 1961. Hereditary cardiovascular dysplasia: a form of familial cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Med. 31:37-62.
12. Horlick, L., N. J. Petrovich, and C. F. Bolton. 1966. Idiopathic hypertrophic subvalvular stenosis: a study ofa family involving four generations: clinical,
hemodynamic and pathologic observations. Am. J. Cardiol. 17:411-418.
13. Clark, C. E., W. L. Henry, and S. E. Epstein. 1973. Familial prevalence
and genetic transmission ofidiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis. N. Engl. J.
Med. 289:709-714.
14. Haughland, H., O.-J. Ohn, H. Boman, and E. Thorsby. 1986. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in three generations of a large Norwegian family: a clinical,
echocardiographic and genetic study. Br. Heart J. 55:168-175.
15. Maron, B. J., A. J. Tajik, H. D. Ruttenberg, T. P. Graham, G. F. Attwood,
B. E. Victorica, J. T. Lie, and W. C. Roberts. 1982. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in infants: clinical features and natural history. Circulation. 65:7-17.
16. Maron, B. J., P. F. Nichols, L. W. Pickle, Y. E. Wesley, and J. J. Mulvihill.
1984. Patterns of inheritance in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: assessment by
M-mode and two-dimensional echocardiography. Am. J. Cardiol. 53:1087-1094.
17. Greaves, S. C., A. H. Roche, J. M. Neutze, R. M. Whitlock, and A. M.
Veale. 1987. Inheritance of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a cross-sectional and
M mode echocardiographic study of 50 families. Br. Heart J. 58:259-266.
18. Tanigawa, G., J. A. Jarcho, S. Kass, S. D. Solomon, H. P. Vosberg, J. G.
Seidman, and C. E. Seidman. 1990. A molecular basis for familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: an alpha/beta cardiac myosin heavy chain hybrid gene. Cell.
62:991-998.
19. Geisterfer-Lowrance, A., S. Kass, G. Tanigawa, H. P. Vosberg, W. J.
McKenna, J. G. Seidman, and C. E. Seidman. 1990. A molecular basis for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a beta cardiac myosin heavy chain gene missense mutation. Cell. 62:999-1006.
20. Rosenzweig, A., H. Watkins, D.-S. Hwang, M. Miri, W. J. McKenna, T.
Traill, J. G. Seidman, and C. E. Seidman. 1991. Preclinical diagnosis of familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by genetic analysis of blood lymphocytes. N. Engl.
J. Med. 325:1753-1760.
21. Watkins, H., A. Rosenzweig, D.-S. Hwang, T. Levi, W. J. McKenna, C. E.
Seidman, andJ. G. Seidman. 1992. Characteristics and prognostic significance of
myosin missense mutations in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N. Engl. J.
Med. 326:1108-1114.
22. Jarcho, J. A., W. J. McKenna, J. A. P. Pare, S. D. Solomon, R. F. Holcombe, S. Dickie, T. Levi, H. Donis-Keller, J. G. Seidman, and C. E. Seidman.
1989. Mapping a gene for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy to chromosome
14ql. N. Engl. J. Med. 321:1372-1378.
23. Weber, J. L., and P. E. May. 1989. Abundant class of human DNA polymorphisms which can be typed using the polymerase chain reaction. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 44:388-396.
24. Yuille, M. A. R., R. M. Hampson, R. M. Harris, N. A. Affara, J. R. W.
Yates, and M. A. Ferguson-Smith. 1990. CA repeat polymorphism at the ASS
locus. Nucleic Acids Res. 18:7472.
25. Weber, J. L., A. E. Kwitek, and P. E. May. 1990. Dinucleotide repeat
polymorphism at the DIS103 locus. Nucleic Acids Res. 18:2199.
26. Sharma, V., L. Allen, R. E. Magenis, and M. Litt. 1991. A dinucleotide
repeat polymorphism at the Dl S1 16 locus. Nucleic Acids Res. 19:1169.
27. Polymeropoulos, M. H., D. S. Rath, H. Xiao, and C. R. Merrill. 1991.
Dinucleotide repeat polymorphism at the human preproglucagon gene. Nucleic
Acids Res. 19:688.
28. Polymeropoulos, M. H., H. Xiao, D. S. Rath, and C. R. Merrill. 1990.
Dinucleotide repeat polymorphism at the int-2 proto-oncogene locus (INT-2).
Nucleic Acids Res. 18:7468.
29. Polymeropoulos, M. H., D. S. Rath, H. Xiao, and C. R. Merrill. 1990.
Trinucleotide repeat polymorphism at the human pancreatic phospholipase A-2
gene (PLA2). Nucleic Acids Res. 18:7468.
30. Polymeropoulos, M. H., H. Xiao, D. S. Rath, and C. R. Merrill. 1991.
Dinucleotide repeat polymorphism at the human cardiac beta-myosin gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 19:4019.
31. Epstein, N. D., L. Fananapazir, H. J. Lin, J. Mulvihill, R. White, J.-M.
Lalouel, R. P. Lifton, A. W. Nienhuis, and M. Leppert. 1992. Evidence ofgenetic
heterogeneity in five kindreds with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 85:635-647.
32. Solomon, S. D., A. A. T. Geisterfer-Lowrance, H.-P. Vosberg, G. Hiller,
J. A. Jarcho, C. C. Morton, W. 0. McBride, A. L. Mitchell, A. E. Bale, W. J.
McKenna, et al. 1990. A locus for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is
closely linked to the cardiac myosin heavy chain genes, CRI-L436, and CRI-L329
on chromosome 14 at ql I-q12. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47:389-394.
33. Jaenicke, T., K. W. Diederich, W. Haas, J. Schleich, P. Lichter, and H.-P.
Vosberg. 1990. The complete sequence of the human # myosin heavy chain gene
and an analysis of its product. Genomics. 8:194-206.
34. Devereux, J., P. Haeberli, and 0. Smithies. 1984. A comprehensive set of
sequence analysis programs for the VAX. Nucleic Acids Res. 12:387-395.

Sporadic Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Due to De Novo Myosin Mutations

1671

