003 1-3998/90/2803-0247$02.00/0
PEDIATRIC RESEARCH
Copyright O 1990 International Pediatric Research Foundation, Inc.

Vol. 28, No. 3, 1990
Prinred in U.S.A.

Impaired Skin Fibroblast Carnitine Uptake in
Primary Systemic Carnitine Deficiency
Manifested by Childhood Carnitine-Responsive
Cardiomyopathy
I. TEIN, D. C. DE VIVO, F. BIERMAN, P. PULVER, L. J. DE MEIRLEIR, L. CVITANOVICSOJAT, R. A. PAGON, E. BERTINI, C. DIONISI-VICI, S. SERVIDEI, AND S. DIMAURO

H. Houston Merritt Clinical Research Center for Muscular Dystrophy and Related Diseases [S.D.], The Division
of Pediatric Neurology [I. T., D.C.D. V., P.P.], and The Division of Pediatric Cardiology [F.B.], Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032; Department of Pediatric Neurology, Academisch Ziekenhuis, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium [L.J.D.M.];Clinique de Pediatrie, Hosp. Clin. Dr. M. Stojanovic, Zagreb,
Yugoslavia [L.C.-S.];Children's Hospital and Medical Center, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98105 [R.A.P.];Departments of Metabolism and Cardiology, Bambino Gesu Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy
[E.B., C.D.-V.]; and Institute of Neurology, Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy [S.S.]

ABSTRACT. Evidence is emerging that primary systemic
carnitine deficiency, a potentially lethal but eminently
treatable inborn error of fatty acid oxidation, involves a
cellular defect in the uptake of carnitine. We present four
unrelated children with primary carnitine-responsive cardiomyopathy, weakness (with or without hypoketotic hypoglycemic encephalopathy), low serum and/or tissue carnitine concentrations, and severe renal carnitine leak. Dicarboxylic acids were absent in the urine of three children
who were tested, and all four had a rapid and dramatic
improvement in cardiac function, strength, and somatic
growth after carnitine therapy. We studied carnitine uptake
in cultured skin fibroblasts from all four children and seven
of the eight healthy nonconsanguinous parents. [3H]~-carnitine uptake was evaluated in vitro under linear time
kinetics. Substrate concentrations were varied from 0.1 to
1000 wM. Physiologic uptake was determined at carnitine
concentrations between 0.1 and 50 wM. Nonspecific uptake
was determined at a concentration of 10 mM. The four
patients had negligible uptake throughout the physiologic
range, implying a marked deficiency in the specific highaffinity, low-concentration, carrier-mediated uptake mechanism. At a concentration of 5 pmol/L, the mean velocity
of uptake in the four patients was 2% of control values.
Their parents showed intermediate maximal rates of carnitine uptake ranging from 13 to 44% of control V,,,
values, but normal Km values, suggesting that the heterozygotes had a reduced number of normal functioning carnitine transporters. The observed reduction in V,,, values
for the parents supports an autosomal recessive inheritance
pattern and may be a more sensitive indicator of heterozygosity than serum carnitine concentrations. We conclude
that carnitine uptake studies in cultured skin fibroblasts
are important for diagnosis, screening of siblings and heterozygote parents, understanding pathogenesis, and investigating the molecular basis of this disease. Given the
Received March 14, 1990; accepted May 1, 1990.
Correspondence and reprint requests: Dr. S. DiMauro, Department of Neurology, Rm. 4-420, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 630
West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032.
Supported by Center grants NS 11766 from the National Institute of Neurological
and Communicative Disorders and Stroke, the Muscular Dystrophy Association,
and the Colleen Giblin Foundation for Pediatric Neurological Research. I.T. is a
recipient of the Duncan L. Gordon Fellowship from the Toronto Hospital for Sick
Children Foundation.

2

frequent history of previously unexplained sibling deaths
in these familes, early identification of presymptomatic
siblings and oral institution of carnitine prophylaxis may
decrease immediate and long-term morbidity and mortality.
(Pediatr Res 28: 247-255,1990)
Abbreviations
CK, creatine kinase
IQ, intelligence quotient
MCAD, medium-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase
RBC, red blood cell

Carnitine (P-hydroxy-y-trimethylaminobutyric acid), a quaternary amine, has several important intracellular functions. 1 ) It
serves as an essential cofactor for mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation by transfening long-chain fatty acids as acylcarnitine
esters across the inner mitochondrial membrane. 2) It facilitates
branched-chain a-keto acid oxidation. 3) It shuttles acyl moieties
chain-shortened by P-oxidation out of peroxisomes in the liver.
4) It modulates the intramitochondrial acyl CoA/CoA sulfhydryl
ratio in mammalian cells. Carnitine also has a detoxifying role
of trapping potentially toxic acyl CoA metabolites that may
increase during acute metabolic crises. Bremer (1) provides a
synopsis of references for the potential roles of carnitine.
A major difficulty in assessing the role of carnitine deficiency
in both genetic and acquired defects of fatty acid oxidation in
childhood is that only a few disorders have been unequivocally
attributed to primary carnitine deficiency.
Since 1973 (2), many patients with carnitine deficiency have
been described, and they have been divided into two groups.
Those with "systemic carnitine deficiency" had recurrent episodes of hypoglycemic, hypoketotic encephalopathy or "Reyelike" syndrome beginning in infancy or early childhood and low
concentrations of carnitine in serum, muscle, and liver. Patients
with "myopathic carnitine deficiency" had progressive lipid storage myopathy beginning in childhood or later in life, and carnitine deficiency was confined to skeletal muscle (3-5). However,
recently, it has become apparent that many of these cases were,
in fact, due to a variety of defects involving P-oxidation or the
respiratory chain with secondary carnitine deficiency (6). For

248

TEIN ETAL.

example, many patients initially diagnosed to have systemic
carnitine deficiency were found to have MCAD deficiency (7,
8). A common feature of genetic defects associated with secondary carnitine deficiency is an intramitochondrial block of oxidation of one or more of the acyl CoA compounds that can be
esterified to carnitine. These defects (6) include specific inborn
errors of fatty acid or amino acid oxidation, such as MCAD,
long-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase, short-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase, and multiple acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiencies,
isovaleric acidemia, propionic acidemia, methyl malonic aciduria, P-hydroxy-P-methylglutaryl CoA lyase deficiency, and glutaryl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. Although information on
the tissue carnitine concentrations is not complete for all of these
disorders, most seem to share the abnormalities seen in MCAD
deficiency, namely low plasma concentrations of total carnitine,
increased ratio of esterified carnitineltotal carnitine, and low
tissue concentrations of total carnitine. Similarly, certain patients
with adult onset chronic weakness formerly diagnosed to be
primary muscle carnitine deficiency have now been diagnosed
to have other defects such as short-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency (9, 10). A further important and still controversial
issue in these cases of secondary carnitine deficiency is the degree
to which carnitine therapy is beneficial in either acute or chronic
situations (6).
Therefore, a definition of primary carnitine deficiency should
be based on the following criteria: I ) the metabolic disorder is
caused directly by inadequate carnitine; 2) it is accompanied by
impaired fatty acid oxidation; 3) it is corrected when carnitine
concentrations are restored to normal; and 4) it is not secondary
to a defect of mitochondria1 P-oxidation.
Possible causes of primary carnitine deficiency include: I )
defective biosynthesis and dietary intake; 2) defective intestinal
absorption; 3 ) defective transport affecting uptake and/or release
of carnitine from tissues; 4) renal loss due to decreased tubular
reabsorption or increased excretion; and 5) increased degradation. No evidence for defective carnitine biosynthesis (1 l), defective absorption, or excessive degradation (12) was found in
several patients with systemic carnitine deficiency, all of whom,
however, were identified subsequently to have MCAD deficiency.
Evidence for a defect in cellular carnitine uptake was first
offered in 1988 (13, 14). Eriksson et al. (13) documented carnitine deficiency in cultured fibroblasts from a 4-y-old girl with
cardiomyopathy and found intermediate carnitine concentrations in the fibroblasts of the asymptomatic mother. Carnitine
transport was studied directly by Treem et al. (14) in fibroblasts
from an infant girl with hypoketotic, hypoglycemic coma, markedly decreased carnitine concentrations in plasma, liver, and
muscle, and normal acyl CoA dehydrogenase activities. Carnitine
administration corrected the defect in fasting ketogenesis and
restored normal carnitine concentrations in plasma and liver,
but not in muscle.
We have studied four unrelated patients with primary carnitine-responsive cardiomyopathy. Studies of carnitine uptake in
cultured fibroblasts indicate that a defect in carnitine transport
is the cause of carnitine deficiency in these children. We also
found defective carnitine uptake in fibroblasts from the presumed heterozogyte parents of these patients, suggesting autosomal-recessive inheritance.

CASE REPORTS

Case 1. A 9%-y-old girl was born of unrelated asymptomatic
parents of East Indian and Caucasian heritage. A sister had
congenital hypotonia and muscle atrophy, progressive cardiomyopathy with severe mitral regurgitation diagnosed at 1 y,
failure to thrive, and progressive motor deterioration. She died
at 3 y 5 mo of age and had fatty infiltration of the liver at
autopsy.
The index patient was born a footling breech. A cardiac
murmur was first noted at 1 mo of age. By 14 mo, her gross
motor milestones plateaued, and over the next 2 y, she developed
slowly progressive weakness and recurrent respiratory infections
(Table I). At 3 y of age, the patient's clinical findings included
congestive heart failure with moderate-to-severe mitral regurgitation. Marked left ventricular dilatation was present on cardiac
ultrasound examination. The ECG demonstrated peaked T
waves in the anterolateral precordial leads. She was started on
digoxin and diuretics. At 4 y 3 mo of age, she was found to have
very low carnitine concentrations in serum and muscle (Table
2). A muscle biopsy showed lipid storage, but P-oxidation enzymes were normal. Serum CK was mildly elevated. Serum
glucose was normal, as were urinary organic acids. There was no
dicarboxylic aciduria. Oral carnitine was started at 1 g 3 times
daily. In 1 wk, there was a dramatic improvement in appetite
and affect and cardiac function (Fig. 1). By 4 wk, she had gained
weight and markedly increased exercise tolerance, and the ECG
showed inversion of the formerly peaked T waves. By 4 mo, she
had good exercise tolerance and cardiac end diastolic and end
systolic dimensions had markedly improved (Fig. I). At 5 y of
age, she had regained gross motor milestones. Her digoxin and
diuretics were discontinued by 6'12 y. Presently, at 9 y of age, she
has an IQ of 140 and is a competitive swimmer at school. On
examination, she has a mildly myopathic facies, mild hypotonia,
absent extensor digitorum brevis bilaterally, and persistent, although improving, fine motor delay. Electromyogram was normal. Motor nerve conduction studies revealed borderline abnormalities. Her serum carnitine concentrations fluctuate between
borderline and normal, and she continues to have decreased
renal reabsorption of carnitine. Her father's serum carnitine
concentrations are normal (total 60.9, free 54.7 pmol/L),and her
mother's are low normal (total 35.7, free 27.8 pmol/L).
Case 2. A 10-y-old Italian boy was born of nonconsanguinous
parents. At 17 mo of age, he had gross motor delay and failure
to thrive, and at 18 mo he began having recurrent episodes of
abdominal pain and diarrhea for which cow's milk protein
intolerance was excluded (Table 1). At 7 % y, he was found to
have a dilatative cardiomyopathy by chest x-ray and echocardiography with peaked T waves on ECG. He had marked hypochromic anemia requiring blood transfusions, and decreased
serum iron of 25 pg/dL (normal 50-120). Thalassemia was ruled
out. He also had weakness of neck flexor and limb-girdle muscles.
He had an IQ of 67 and failure to thrive. He had low carnitine
concentrations in serum and muscle (Table 2), as well as a
striking decrease in renal reabsorption of carnitine (52%; normal
>95%) despite low serum concentrations. Both parents had low
serum carnitine concentrations (father: total 35, free 24 pmol/L;
mother: total 21, free 14 pmol/L; control: total 45 + 6.5, free 34
+ 8.8 pmol/L). Serum glucose and CK and urinary organic acid

Table 1. Maior clinical and lab01.atorv features-CPMC

series*

Age of
onset Presenting
Patient Sex (mo)
feature
1

2
3
4

F
M
F
F

1

17

1
2

Decrease in
Decrease in
Affected Cardio- Weakness or Lipid storage
fasting ketorenal reab- Dicarboxylic
siblings myopathy motor delay in muscle Coma
genesis
FTT Anemia sorption
aciduria
+
Cardiac
+
+
+
ND
+ +
+
Motor delay
+
ND
+
+
+ +
Hypotonia
ND
Cardiac
+
+
+
+
?
+?
+
NR
NR

+

+

+

+
+

+

* CPMC, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center; FTT, failure to thrive; ND, not done; NR, not recorded.

+

+

249

CARNITINE-RESPONSIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY

Table 2. Response to carnitine therapy-CPMC series*
Serum carnitine totallfree
(~mol/L)

Muscle carnitine
totallfree (~rnol/g)

Patient

Before

After

Before

After

1
2
3
4

19/15?
1.2/1.2/
0
91544

25-60117-33$
9-2819-1 711

0.17/0.11ยง
].I**
ND
0.97**

ND
2.7tt
ND
ND

Wt (percentile)

Anemia (Hb g/dL)

Before

Improved function

After

Before

After

Motor

Cardiac

3
3

50
50
$$

<20

11 11

10.2
5
NR
Hct 28%

12.2
7.1-11.8
NR
Hct 38%

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

Cognitive

+
-

NR

+

* CPMC, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center; NCP, noncollagen protein; ND, not done; NR, not recorded.
f Normal control values: 5 1.5 f 11.6/40.0
$ l wk later.

4 Normal

+ 9.5 Pmol/L.

control values: 3.6112.69 + 0.56 Pmol/g wet wt.

1) Normal control values: 45 + 6.5134 + 8.8 jtmol/L.

7 1-2 y later.
**Normal control values: 20.5 f 8.7/18.0 + 8.1 pmol/g NCP.
f f l y later.
$$ Wt increased; percentile not determined.
$9 Normal control values: 35-56129-45 pmol/L.
11 11 Wt increased 1.5 kg after 5/12 y; percentile not determined.

Months of therapy
Fig. 1. Left ventricular dimensions in patient 1. Longitudinal follow-up of ratio between actual and percent predicted left ventricular end diastolic
(El) and end systolic (+) dimensions after initiation of carnitine therapy. Accelerated response evident during 1st mo of therapy persists toward a
plateau by 8 mo of treatment.

profile were normal. Muscle biopsy showed lipid storage myopathy with normal mitochondria. He was started on oral carnitine
therapy (150 mg/kg/d) and digoxin, and his heart rate dropped
from 120 to 80 beats per min in a few days. There was a gradual
improvement of cardiac function and the ECG normalized in 2
y. The patient regained normal strength and weight in 1 y and
the recurrent abdominal pains subsided. He continued to have
hypochromic anemia with Hb levels between 7 and 12 g/dL. A
repeat IQ was 75. By 9 y of age, he had shown significant clinical
improvement, and a second muscle biopsy showed no lipid
accumulation despite persistently low serum and muscle carnitine concentrations (Table 2).
Case 3. A 4%-y-old girl of Yugoslovian origin born of healthy
nonconsanguinous parents had normal early growth but was
always hypotonic. At 2'12 y, during an episode of pharyngitis, she
became flaccid and somnolent and, on hospitalization, was found
to have hypoglycemia ( 1 mmol/L), elevated serum glutamicoxaloacetic transaminase, and normal ammonia. An EEG re-

vealed large amplitude slow waves. She returned to normal and
had normal serum glucose after 24 h; the serum glutamicoxaloacetic transaminase and EEG normalized after 1 wk. She
experienced similar episodes at 3 and 3% y of age, coinciding
with viral infections and fever and accompanied by nonketotic
hypoglycemia, elevation of total serum lipoproteins, and increased CK (1280 U/L; normal <150). Serum and urine amino
acids and serum lactate and pyruvate were normal. An oral
glucose tolerance test after insulin and glucagon challenges was
normal. Echocardiogram revealed a cardiomyopathy. A 24-h
fasting test resulted in marked hypoglycemia and somnolence
that lasted 3 d despite glucose infusion. Total serum lipoproteins
were again elevated and CK was slightly raised. During a separate
17-h fast, urine organic acids were normal. Free carnitine in the
blood was undetectable in the presence of high urinary acyl
carnitine, suggesting a renal carnitine leak. Oral carnitine therapy
resulted in marked improvement of cardiac function with normal
echocardiogram and ECG, increased strength, and improved
appetite and growth.

TEIN ET AL.

Fig. 2. Carnitine uptake studies. Mean (+SEM) rates of carnitine uptake by cultured skin fibroblasts from patient 1 (W), mother of patient 1 (D),
father of patient I (A), and six controls (0).
The data represent two separate experiments (each performed in duplicate) in the patient and her parents
and three to four separate experiments (each performed in duplicate) in each control. a, rates of uptake with extracellular carnitine concentrations
ranging from 0.1 to 2.0 pmol/L. b, rates of uptake with extracellular carnitine concentrations ranging from 1.0 to 50 ~ m o l / L .

Table 3. Carnitine uptake in cultured fibroblasts
Km

V,,,

( 10-6 mol/L)

Normal controls
( n = 6; 3 female, 3 male)

uptake

% Control

vmax

( 10-l2 mol/min/mg)

5.5 + 0.58*

3.4

+ 0.36*

100

Disease controls
Carnitine palmitoyl transferase deficiency
Methylmalonic acidemia
Hyperinsulinism
Primary cardiomyopathy
Mother
5.0
5.0
5.8
5.7

Parents
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4

Father
5.0
5.0
5.8

Mother
1.33
1.50
1.33
0.57

Father
1.33
0.44
0.75

Mother
40
44
40
17

Father
40
13
22

* Mean + SD.
Table 4. Maior clinical features-literature

Reference
Chapoy et a/. (19) 1980
Tripp et a/. (20) 1981
Case 1
Case 2
Waber et al. (2 1) 1982
Eriksson et a/. (13) 1988
Case 1
Case 2
Treem et a/. (14) 1988

Affected
Age at
siblings
onset
(n)
Consanguinity (mo)
Sex
M

+(I)

-

3

F
M
M

+(3)
+(3)
+(I)

-

11
26
40

F
M
F

+(I)
+(I)

-

+

Presenting
feature
Coma

+ cardiac

Cardiac
Cardiac
Cardiac

<48
Cardiac
<I 8
Cardiac
3.5 Coma

series

Cardio- Weakness or
myopathy motor delay Coma/seizure Hepatomegaly

+

+

+
+
+
+
+
+

-

+/+

+
-(+sibs)

+
+

+
+/+

+

Table 5. Laboratory features and response to carnitine therapy-literature series
% Normal tissue

Beneficial response to carnitine therapy

carnitine

4

Reference

Sex

jJ
Blood
sugar

Chapoy et al.
(19) 1980
Tripp et al.
(20) 1981
Case 1
Case 2
Waber et al.
(21) 1982
Eriksson et al.
(13) 1988
Case 1
Case 2
Treem et al.
(14) 1988

M

+

F
M
M

F
M
F

Fasting
ketogenesis

+

Dicarboxylicaciduria
-

-

-

+

-

+

-

(small adipic)

* N (normal control values) = 35.5 -1- 5.6 pmol/L.

t N = 35-75

pmol/L.
$ N = 20-80 pmol/L.
5 N = 37-58128-47 pmol/L.

Anemia

+
+

+

Plasma
carnitine
pM total
(free)
4.8*

Muscle
1.5

Liver
6

4.8 (3.6)t
4.5 (3.5)t
4.2$

1
1
2

30

<3%

<1

0-2.29

<1

Heart

5

Lipid
storage
in
muscle

Lipid
storage
inliver

+

+

+
+

+

<1
5

+

+

d

Renal
% reabsorption

%

Normal
muscle
carnitine
40

Plasma
carnitine pM
total(free)
18

5

13-44 (12-36)

+
+
+

22-55

Muscle

Cardiac

+

+

+
+

+
+

Ketogenesis

+
2.6

44 (24)

+

252

TEIN ETAL.

Case 4. A 7Ih-y-old girl was born uneventfully of healthy
nonconsanguinous Mexican parents. An older brother died at
age 6 of progressive congestive heart failure. A second 13-y-old
brother suffers from chronic bronchiectasis without cardiac disease and has developmental delay and unusual facial features
but normal chromosomes.
The proband was noted to have an anemia at 15 d of age. At
2 mo, she had anorexia and diaphoresis on feeding, and a heart
murmur was detected. At 7 mo, the anemia was characterized as
normochromic and normocytic with a low reticulocyte count
(Table 2). Serum iron, total iron binding capacity, and femtin
were normal. Repeated work-ups for blood loss were negative. A
bone marrow biopsy at 32 mo showed decreased iron stores, for
which she was treated. A Hb electrophoresisat 54/~2y was normal.
There was mild gross motor delay; she rolled over at 9 mo and
walked at 18 mo. A chest x-ray and ECG at 19 mo were
reportedly normal. From 3 y of age, she had progressive failure
to thrive, anorexia, low energy, elevated respiratory rate, and
occasional complaints of chest pain. An echocardiogram at 5 % ~
Y revealed mild cardiomegal~.At age 5, she also suffered from
multiple episodes of somnolence and vomiting at school that
forced her to return home. She was admitted to the hospital at
69/~2y in severe congestive heart failure with mitral regurgitation.
Echocardiography revealed a dilated cardiomyopathy involving
both the left and the right side of the heart with poor contractility.
An ECG revealed mild 1st degree heart block, biventricular
hypertrophy, and peaked T waves. She also had generalized
weakness with decreased muscle bulk and persistent anemia
(hematocrit 30). Initial therapy included digoxin and furosemide.
Metabolic investigations revealed very low Serum carnitine Concentrations with normal levels of short- and long-chain esterified
acyl carnitines. CK was normal. Muscle biopsy showed type I
fiber predominance, lipid storage, and subsarcolemmal aggregates of enlarged mitochondria containing lipid and dense matrix
granules. On oral carnitine therapy, she had marked clinical and
ECG improvement with concomitant reduction of cardiac chamber dimensions. Motor function also improved, although she has
some residual weakness (415) in the shoulder girdle after 5 mo
of therapy. Her affect and school performance have improved
dramatically and she is currently a top student.

Cell protein was measured in the remaining 200 pL of the
hydrolysate for each individual plate by the method of Lowry et
al. (17). All experiments were performed in duplicate and run in
parallel with one or two control cultures. Reproducibility of
results was confirmed by separate experiments with the same cell
line. Specific uptake of radioactivity was used to calculate the
rates of total carnitine uptake. Apparent Michaelis-Menten constants (Km and V,,, values) were determined by linear regression
analysis of Lineweaver-Burk plots.
Carnitine uptake studies were also performed in patients with
other defects in fatty acid oxidation (e.g. carnitine palmitoyl
transferase deficiency) as well as with secondary carnitine deficiency (e.g. methylmalonic aciduria) to confirm the specificity
and sensitivity of our studies for a primary carnitine transporter
defect.
RESULTS

Table 1 summarizes the major clinical and laboratory features
of our four cases. Two children had affected siblings, but none
the families were consanguinous and the ethnic origins were
varied, ~ 1 had
1 early age of onset varying from 1 mo to 17 mo.
The presenting features were cardiomyopathyin two cases, motor
delay in one, and hypotonia in the fourth case. All four children
had cardiomyopathy with markedly increased cardiac dimensions and three had strikingly peaked T waves on ECG. Motor
weakness and delay with lipid storage myopathy were noted in
three cases and two children had mild elevations of serum CK.
Enzymes of P-oxidation in muscle were normal in the one child
in whom they were measured. One child (patient 3) had documented and one (patient 4) had suspected decreased fasting
ketogenesis, which probably predisposed them to episodes of
hypoglycemic encephalopathy.
Three &Idren had failure to thrive and anemia. Only one
child had fixed cognitive delay. Decreased renal reabsorption of
carnitine was found in the three children in whom it was measured. Abnormal dicarboxylic aciduria was not found in any of
the three children in whom it was measured.
The concentrations of serum carnitine were very low in all
four children before carnitine supplementation (Table 2), and
were not completely normalized even with large-dose oral carnitine therapy. Both parents of patient 2 had low serum carnitine
MATERIALS A N D METHODS
values although not nearly as low as their son's. Muscle carnitine
All studies on the patients were performed with prior informed values were 4 and 6% of normal in two children and remained
parental consent and with the approval of the institutional review low (15%) in one child who underwent a repeat muscle biopsy
boards of the various universities and hospitals. Total and free months after carnitine therapy.
On the basis of clinical, echocardiographic, and ECG criteria,
carnitine concentrations in plasma, urine, and muscle were
measured as described by McGany and Foster (15) for cases 1 cardiac function improved dramatically in all four cases after
and 4. Urinary organic acids for case 1 were measured by Dr. therapy, and the improvement was notable even within 1 mo of
Orville Mamer (McGill University, Montreal, Canada). Dicar- therapy. For example, in patient 1, the left ventricular endboxylic acids were identified in the urine as the trimethylsilyl diastolic dimension had decreased from 205 to 163% predicted
derivatives by gas-liquid chromatography and were confirmed (normal, loo%), the left ventricular end-systolic dimension had
by gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy. The urinary frac- decreased from 237 to 174% predicted (normal, loo%), and the
tional excretion of carnitine was calculated on the basis of the ECG showed a dramatic change with an inversion of the formerly
ratio of the clearance of carnitine to the clearance of creatinine. peaked T waves in the lateral precordial leads. Clinically, motor
Muscle biopsy specimens were immediately frozen for histo- function was significantly improved in all four patients who had
chemistry and for the measurements of carnitine and P-oxidation been weak before therapy. Two children showed significant
enzymes. Other portions were fixed for light and electron mi- improvement in affect and school performance after carnitine
croscopy. All @-oxidationenzymes in muscle were assayed spec- therapy. Three children had significant failure to thrive with a
trophotometrically, as previously described by Trevisan et al. remarkable improvement after therapy. In contrast, there was
variable improvement in the variegate anemia documented in
(16).
Fibroblasts from the patients and their parents (passage 6-14) three cases.
Carnitine uptake in fibroblasts from normal controls suggested
and from six control subjects (passage 6- 12) were plated onto
9.5 cm2 six-well plates (Gibco Laboratories, St. Lawrence, MA) the presence of a high-afinity, low-concentration, specific carand allowed to grow to confluence in RPMI 1640 medium rier-mediated transport process with an apparent Km of 5.5 &
(Gibco) supplemented with 10% FCS (medium total carnitine, 0.58 pM and a maximal velocity in rate of uptake of 3.4 & 0.36
2 pmol/L). The uptake of carnitine was investigated in cultured pmol/min/mg of protein (Fig. 2A and B; Table 3). These findings
skin fibroblasts by the method of Treem et al. (14). Cell-bound are in reasonable agreement with previously reported values (14,
radioactivity was determined in 800 hL of the final fibroblast 18). Similar values were obtained in one child with carnitine
hydrolysate using Aquasol-2 with a counting efficiency of 60%. palmitoyl transferase deficiency (Km = 5.0 pM; V,, = 3.33

CARNITINE-RESPONSIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY

pmol/min/mg) and in another with hyperinsulinism (Km = 6.6
pM; Vmax= 3.00 pmol/min/mg). Treem et al. (14) also showed
that children with secondary carnitine deficiency disorders due
to medium-chain and long-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiencies had Km and V,,, values similar to those of controls.
In contrast, the fibroblasts from our four patients showed
minimal or no uptake of carnitine throughout the entire range
of physiologic concentrations of carnitine precluding the possibility of calculating Km and V,,, values (Fig. 2A and B; Table
3). At a carnitine concentration of 5 pmol/L, the mean rate of
uptake in the four patients was 0.0432 (2%) as compared with
1.955 5 0.440 pmol/min/mg protein in the controls. Their
parents, on the other hand, showed intermediate maximal rates
of carnitine uptake ranging from 13 to 44% of control V,,,
values, whereas Km values were normal (Fig. 2A and B; Table
3). At very high concentrations of carnitine (10 mM), patients,
parents, and controls had the same rate of carnitine uptake,
reflecting a common low-affinity, high-concentration, nonspecific diffusion uptake.
PREVIOUSLY REPORTED CASES

If the diagnosis of primary systemic carnitine deficiency requires direct demonstration of a carnitine uptake defect, then
only the case of Treem et al. (14) should be considered in addition
to our patients. However, there are six other cases that warrant
consideration on the basis of indirect evidence including: 1 ) very
low serum and tissue carnitine concentrations, 2) cardiomyopathy, 3) a rapid and dramatic response to carnitine therapy or, if
no carnitine was given, a positive family history of a similarly
affected sibling with carnitine-responsive cardiomyopathy, and
4) absence of abnormal dicarboxylic aciduria, which is seen in
patients with secondary deficiency due to defects in P-oxidation
or a lack of repletion of carnitine tissue stores despite oral
carnitine therapy, implying a transporter defect (Tables 4 and 5).
Primary carnitine-responsive cardiomyopathy was also distinguished from cases of X-linked cardiomyopathy with neutropenia, short stature, abnormal carnitine metabolism, and dicarboxylic aciduria (22-24).
DISCUSSION

Our results confirm that these four children have primary
carnitine deficiency. All had very low serum carnitine and three
also had low concentrations of muscle carnitine. Impairment of
fatty acid oxidation was suggested by deficient ketogenesis during
fasting and by the accumulation of lipid in muscle. The tissues
most severely affected, heart, muscle, liver, and kidneys, derive
much of their energy from fatty acid oxidation, for which carnitine is essential. The normal actitivies of P-oxidation enzymes in
the muscle of one patient and the absence of dicarboxylic aciduria in three patients indicate that carnitine deficiency in these
children was not secondary to other defects of fatty acid oxidation
known to be associated with secondary carnitine deficiency. The
rapid and dramatic clinical improvement in cardiac function,
strength, and growth also suggested that the defect was due to
primary carnitine deficiency and not to other abnormalities of
fatty acid oxidation. In patients with secondary carnitine deficiency, it is still controversial as to whether carnitine therapy is
beneficial in the acute or chronic stages (6).
The studies of carnitine uptake in vitro support the concept
that primary carnitine deficiency is due to a defect in the active
transport of carnitine, as suggested by Treem et al. (14) and
Eriksson et al. (13). Under normal conditions, the carnitine
concentration in tissues other than brain is 20- to 50-fold higher
than in plasma (6). Uptake therefore occurs across a large concentration gradient and is maintained by a transport system
driven by a large sodium potential across the plasma membrane
(1,25). Because carnitine is not degraded in the body, the kidney
is primarily responsible for controlling body stores and is capable

253

of adjusting to wide variations in dietary carnitine because it has
a threshold of 40 pmol/L, which is identical to the normal serum
concentration (26). Three patients in our series in whom urinary
carnitine was measured showed decreased renal reabsorption,
indicating a defect of carnitine transport in the kidney, as demonstrated in several literature cases (13, 14, 21). Also, muscle
carnitine did not return to normal in our patient 2 when plasma
carnitine concentrations were raised, suggesting that transport
may also be impaired in muscle, as suggested by Treem et al.
(14). Muscle carnitine concentration in three of our patients, as
well as in six other reported childhood cases, was below 5% of
normal, and below 2% in six of them, indicating severe tissue
depletion. Furthermore, in several literature cases in which the
carnitine-deficient patients underwent second muscle biopsies,
carnitine therapy also failed to normalize the carnitine concentrations in muscle (14,20), although there may have been clinical
improvement or decreased muscle lipid storage (Table 5).
Our in vitro fibroblast studies showed a defect in the specific
high-affinity, low-concentration, carrier-mediated carnitine uptake mechanism. Other clinically affected tissues in our patients
could have been depleted of carnitine because of the low serum
carnitine concentrations, which, in turn, were due to decreased
renal conservation. In this case, however, one would expect tissue
concentrations to be corrected when serum carnitine concentration is restored to normal. Alternatively, some tissues may share
with fibroblasts a defect in the specific plasma membrane carnitine transporter, which would explain why carnitine concentrations failed to increase after carnitine replacement therapy. The
therapeutic effect of carnitine administration may then result
from the flooding of the unaffected nonspecific-diffusion, lowaffinity, high-concentration uptake mechanism, thereby bypassing the specific carrier-mediated transporter.
In contrast to muscle, liver carnitine concentrations rose dramatically from 3.5 to 400% and from 5 to 55% of normal in two
patients reported in the literature after oral supplementation (14,
19), suggesting that carnitine depletion in liver was due to low
serum carnitine concentrations. Treem et al. (14) proposed that
their patient had a defect in a plasma membrane carnitine carrier
that normally is shared by muscle, kidney, and fibroblasts but
not by liver. Our patient 2 suggests similar conclusions. Whether
the severe cardiomyopathy is due to low serum carnitine or to a
specific transporter defect is unclear because no patient has had
repeat endocardia1 biopsies. Evidence for a specific transporter
defect in muscle and heart could be provided by carnitine uptake
studies in cultured skeletal or cardiac muscle from patients. The
Km values for carnitine uptake in cultured human heart cells
(4.8 + 2.2 pM) (27) and muscle (1.90 f 1.38 pM) (18) were
similar to the Km observed by us in cultured fibroblasts (6.0 a
0.66 pM) and very different from the Km values observed in
human liver (500 pM) (28) and brain (>lo00 pM) (28).
On review of the literature, the age of presentation was under
4 y of age in seven cases and under 12 mo in three (Table 4).
The presenting feature was cardiomyopathy in six cases and
coma in two. Cardiomyopathy was present in all cases by definition. The response to carnitine was dramatic, specific, and
evident within the 1st mo of therapy. In our case 1, the initiation
of carnitine therapy made other medications, such as digoxin
and diuretics, unnecessary. The characteristic peaked T waves
on ECG also disappeared with therapy (cases l , 2 , and 4; ref. 20,
2 1).
Heart has a high concentration of carnitine and is critically
dependent upon fatty acid oxidation as an energy source. In
addition, carnitine plays an important role in trapping toxic
long-chain acyl CoA metabolites that accumulate in ischemia
and may promote sarcolemmal membrane damage and arrhythmias. It has been suggested that long-chain acyl CoA may deform
cellular membranes and potentiate the toxic effects of hydroperoxides, high Ca2+concentrations, or elevated temperatures on
mitochondria1 membranes, and that these toxic effects are delayed by carnitine (29-3 1).

TEIN ET AL.

Weakness was present in most cases, but was surprisingly
absent in one patient (20) despite a low muscle carnitine concentration of 1 %.
Coma was probably due to hypoglycemia which, in turn, may
be explained by the inability to decrease glucose consumption in
later stages of fasting when ketone bodies generated from hepatic
fatty acid oxidation normally replace glucose as a source of
energy. Cognitive delay and pyramidal signs in two cases (14,
19) could have been the consequences of hypoglycemic encephalopathy and cardiac or respiratory arrest.
Unusual and unexplained CNS signs occurred in case 1 of
Tripp et al. (20), a 9-y-old child who began having syncopal
episodes at age 8 and had bilateral extensor plantar responses
and minimal athetoid movements. Similarly, patient 2 in our
series, a 10-y-old boy, had moderate mental retardation with no
obvious predisposing factors on history. The significance of
carnitine to CNS function or development cannot be accurately
assessed at present other than as a key preventive agent against
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy secondary to cardiomyopathy
or hypoglycemic hypoketotic encephalopathy. It is, however,
interesting to note that in cases 1 and 4 of our series and in the
case of Waber et al. (2 l), a dramatic improvement in affect and
cognitive performance was noted after carnitine therapy.
The importance of carnitine for the bowel, another tissue
highly dependent on the oxidation of fatty acids, is raised by our
patient 2, who had recurrent episodes of unexplained diarrhea
and abdominal pains that resolved with carnitine therapy. None
of the reported cases had this problem, but smooth muscle
disorders (e.g. pyloric stenosis, recurrent stridor, and gastroesophageal reflux) were present in 3/4 of the children in the family
described by Tripp et al. (20).
An intriguing question is the possible role of carnitine deficiency in the variegate anemia noted in three of our patients and
in three other reported cases. Some response to carnitine treatment was noted in the three patients in whom Hb was measured
after carnitine administration. In our series, case 2 had a hypochromic anemia and case 4 had a normochromic normocytic
anemia with a low reticulocyte count and normal serum iron.
Both patients of Tripp et al. (20) had a mild anemia and one of
them had a trial of iron therapy with no response. The patient
of Waber et al. (2 1) had a Hb of 10.4 g/dL with mild macrocytosis
and normal serum ferritin, folate, B12,and bone marrow aspirate.
A male sibling of this patient died at age 23 mo with cardiomyopathy and mild anemia unresponsvie to iron therapy. The role
of carnitine in the RBC is not well understood, but it has been
proposed that carnitine may protect the RBC from membrane
damage by toxic fatty acyl CoA derivatives (20, 32) or that it
may improve lipid metabolism in the RBC membrane (33).
Combining our four cases with the seven literature cases
showed a nearly equal sex distribution (6 female; 5 male), a
history of affected siblings in eight cases, and asymptomatic
parents, suggesting an autosomal-recessive pattern of inheritance.
Our finding that the V,,, in all seven parents in our series was
decreased to the heterozygote range (13-44% of control V,,
values) further supports this inheritance pattern and indicates
that even a residual uptake of 13% is sufficient for normal
function. There was no consanguinity in the four families studied
by us and the patients had diverse ethnic backgrounds, suggesting
that the defect is genetically widely distributed. Compared with
uptake studies, serum carnitine concentrations in the parents are
not good indicators for a decreased plasma membrane carnitine
transporter. For example, although both parents of case 2 had
low serum carnitine concentrations, the father of case 1 had
normal serum carnitine concentrations despite a similarly decreased in vitro uptake. The variable serum concentrations in
the presumed heterozygote parents was also described in other
families (14, 20). Therefore, serum carnitine concentrations in
the parents are a useful and simple screen, but in vitro cultured
fibroblast uptake studies provide more definitive evidence of
heterozygosity. The normal Km values for carnitine substrate

concentration and the reduced V,, values for carnitine uptake
in heterozygote parents suggest the presence of a reduced number
of normally functioning carnitine receptors, but this remains to
be confirmed.
Primary systemic carnitine deficiency is a specific entity characterized by carnitine-responsive cardiomyopathy with or without weakness, hypoglycemic hypoketotic encephalopathy, failure
to thrive, and anemia with low plasma and tissue concentrations
of carnitine, lipid storage in muscle and liver, and severe renal
leak of carnitine. Exclusion of other defects in fatty acid oxidation
is essential. The importance of an accurate diagnosis of this
potentially fatal entity lies in the eminently treatable nature of
the disorder through lifelong oral carnitine supplementation.
Carnitine uptake studies in cultured skin fibroblasts are important for diagnosis and screening of siblings and heterozygote
parents. These studies are also useful in understanding pathogenesis and investigating the molecular basis of this disease. Given
the frequent history of previously unexplained sibling deaths in
these families, early identification of presymptomatic siblings
with institution of carnitine supplementation may decrease immediate and long-term morbidity and mortality.

Note added in proof After submission of our manuscript, we
noted the publication by Eriksson et al. 1989 (Transport of
carnitine into cells in hereditary carnitine deficiency. J Inher
Metab Dis 12:108-111) in which the workers directly demonstrated a defect in carrier-dependent carnitine transport in fibroblasts from the girl with the cardiomyopathy previously described
in Ericksson et al. 1988 (Eur J Pediatr 147:662-663, cited as
reference no. 13), thus further supporting our data and adding
another literature case with confirmed skin fibroblast carnitine
uptake defect.
Acknowledgments. The authors thank Dr. Charles A. Stanley,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, for his valuable scientific
advice. We also thank Ann Zaragoza for excellent word processing. The EMG and NCS for case 1 were performed by Dr. Dale
Lange, Neurological Institute, New York.
REFERENCES
I. Bremer J 1983 Carnitine-metabolism and functions. Physiol Rev 63:14201480
2. Engel AG, Angelini C 1973 Carnitine deficiency of human skeletal muscle
with associated lipid storage myopathy: a new syndrome. Science 179399902
3. Angelini C, Trevisan C, Isaya G, Pegolo G, Vergani L 1987 Clinical varieties
of carnitine and carnitine palmitoyl transferase deficiency. Clin Biochem
20: 1-7
4. DiMauro S 1979 Metabolic myopathies. In: Vinken PJ, Bruyn GW (eds)
Handbook of Clinical Neurology, Vol41, Diseases of Muscle, Part 11. North
Holland, New York, pp 175-234
5. Rebouche CJ, Engel AG 1983 Carnitine metabolism and deficiency syndromes.
Mayo Clin Proc 58:533-540
6. Stanley CA 1987 New genetic defects in mitochondria1 fatty acid oxidation
and carnitine deficiency. Adv Pediatr 34:59-88
7. Coates PM, Hale DE, Stanley CA, Glasgow AM 1984 Systemic carnitine
deficiency simulating Reye syndrome. [letter] J Pediatr 105(4):679
8. Hale DE, Cruse RP, Engel AG 1985 Familial systemic carnitine deficiency.
Arch Neurol 42: 1133
9. Turnbull DM, Bartlett K, Stevens DL, Alberti KG, Gibson GJ, Johnson MA,
McCulloch AJ Sherratt HS 1984 Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency associated with a lipid-storage myopathy and secondary carnitine
deficiency. N Engl J Med 31 1:1232-1236
10. Trevisan CP, Reichmann H, De Vivo DC, DiMauro S 1985 Beta-oxidation
enzymes in normal human muscle from a patient with an unusual form of
myopathic carnitine deficiency. Muscle Nerve 8:672-675
I 1. Rebouche CJ, Engel AG 1980 I n vitro analysis of hepatic carnitine biosynthesis
in systemic carnitine deficiency. Clin Chim Acta 106:295-300
12. Rebouche CJ, Engel AG 1984 Kinetic compartmental analysis of carnitine
metabolism in the human carnitine deficiency syndromes. Evidence for
alterations in tissue carnitine transport. J Clin Invest 732357-867
13. Eriksson BO, Lindstedt S, Nordin 1 1988 Hereditary defect in carnitine
membrane transport is expressed in skin fibroblast. Eur J Pediatr 147:662663
14. Treem WR, Stanley CA, Finegold DN, Hale DE, Coates PM 1988 Primary
carnitine deficiency due to a failure of carnitine transport in kidney, muscle
and fibroblasts. N Engl J Med 319(20): 1331-1 336

