Neuroblastoma, Pheochromocytoma, and Renal Cell Carcinoma
Occurrence in

a

Richard S. Fairchild, MD;

Single Patient

Joseph

L.

Kyner, MD; Arlo Hermreck, MD, PhD;

R. Neil

Schimke, MD

A 26-year-old woman had a neuroblastoma during infancy; an extraadrenal pheochromocytoma at age 16 years, with hepatic recurrences during
the next ten years; and multifocal renal cell carcinoma. Neuroblastoma and
pheochromocytoma, despite their common embryologic origin, to our knowledge have not been previously reported as separate tumors in the same
patient. Although many attributes of the patient's tumors suggest a hereditary disorder, thorough investigation disclosed no evidence of heritable
conditions associated with any of these tumors in the patient or her family
members. Long-term observation of persons surviving after treatment of
neuroblastoma will be necessary to determine whether this case represents
a previously unidentified tumor predisposition or a sporadic occurrence.

(JAMA 242:2210-2211, 1979)

neuroblastoma and
pheochromocytoma share many char¬
acteristics, such as their mutual
neural crest origin,1 ability to synthe¬
size catecholamines,2 and rare asso¬
ciation with von Recklinghausen's
disease, to our knowledge, the occur¬
rence of both tumors as distinct and
separate entities in the same patient
has not been previously reported.3
Our patient with both tumors also
had a multifocal renal cell carcino¬

ALTHOUGH

(BP) was 145/120 mm Hg, and
her pulse rate was 160 beats per minute.
Cerebral arteriograms showed no abnor¬
malities. Excretory urography demon¬
strated a calcified mass in the region of
the right kidney. The 24-hour urine vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) value was 16.0 mg
(normal, 0.7 to 7.0 mg/24 hr), and the
catecholamine level was 446 ug (normal,
less than 135 Mg/24 hr). At surgery an
extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma without
neuroblastomatous or ganglioneuromatopressure

sis elements was seen overlying the hilum
of the right kidney. It was so extensive as
to require total nephrectomy and partial
adrenalectomy. No postoperative chemo¬

therapy or radiotherapy was given.
During the next five years, urinary
VMA values ranged from 6.3 to 8.0 mg/24
hr, and diastolic BP remained elevated
between 90 and 100 mm Hg. At age 21
years, her diastolic BP increased to 110
mm Hg, tachycardia recurred, and the
VMA level was 11.2 mg/24 hr. A liver scan
showed a defect in the right lobe, and
arteriography disclosed a single area of
neovascularization in the same region.
Hepatic wedge resection showed the lesion
to be histologically a pheochromocytoma.
Abdominal lymph node biopsy specimens
showed no evidence of métastases, and
inspection of the previous right nephrecto¬
my site, the left kidney, and the adrenal
gland disclosed no abnormalities.
Postoperative VMA values were normal
during the next four years. However, her
BP again progressively increased. At age
26 years, the 24-hour VMA value was 10.3
mg, and repeated arteriography showed
numerous areas of abnormal vascularity

ma.

Report of a Case
A 26-year-old white woman had at age 9
months a neuroblastoma without evidence
of pheochromocytic elements originating
in the left para-aortic region near the
bifurcation of the aorta. Following total
removal of the tumor, the patient received
1,050 rads of local radiotherapy. She
remained asymptomatic until age 16
years, when readmission was necessitated
for severe headaches, left-sided seizures,
and left hemiparesis. Her admission blood
From the Departments of Medicine, Division of
Metabolism, Endocrinology, and Genetics (Drs
Fairchild, Kyner, and Schimke), and Surgery (Dr
Hermreck), University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City.
Reprint requests to 413 C Bldg, Division of
Endocrinology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, 39th and Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KN
66103 (Dr Fairchild).

Fig 1.—Celiac arteriogram. Numerous ar¬
of abnormal vascularity in right lobe of

eas

liver

were

pheochromocytoma.

Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Reprints Desk User on 03/01/2016

Fig 2.—Renal arteriogram. Large area of
neovascularity in inferior pole and smaller
area in superior pole of left kidney were
renal cell carcinoma.

within the liver (Fig 1) and in the remain¬
ing left kidney (Fig 2). Two of the accessi¬
ble hepatic lesions were locally excised and
shown to be pheochromocytomas. The left
kidney contained five separate foci of
renal cell carcinoma, requiring complete
nephrectomy and initiation of long-term

hemodialysis.

At age 24 years, the patient developed a
left thyroid mass. The diagnosis of multi¬
ple endocrine neoplasia type II was
considered. However, hemithyroidectomy
showed the lesion to be a simple cyst
without evidence of medullary thyroid
carcinoma. Thyrocalcitonin levels were
normal. Neither the patient nor any fami¬
ly member had physical stigmata of the
mucosal neuroma syndrome. Thorough
history, physical and ophthalmologic ex¬
amination, intravenous pyelography, chest
roentgenogram, complete blood cell count,
serum calcium and phosphorus, and 24hour urine collection of VMA, metanephrines, and catecholamines showed no
abnormalities in the patient's parents nor
her three siblings.

Comment

The

occurrence

recurrent

of a

neuroblastoma,

pheochromocytoma, and

multifocal renal cell carcinoma in this
patient is of interest for several
reasons. From a developmental point
of view, the neural crest contributes
to the formation of a diversity of
tissues, including autonomie ganglia
and the adrenal medulla.1 Tumors of
this embryologie tissue thus would
include neuroblastoma and pheochro¬
mocytoma. Most commonly, neuroblastomas present as an abdominal
mass in infancy or early childhood,

although

unusual symptoms
reported.4 Pheochromocy¬
toma may appear in children, but it is
most frequently found in persons
more

have been

between the ages of 20 and 50 years.
Either tumor may be familial, in
which case they are frequently bilat¬
eral or multifocal.4
The hepatic sites of pheochromocy¬
toma in our patient could have been
métastases. Multiple lesions may
have been present initially, however,
as evidenced by the failure of the
urinary VMA levels to become com¬
pletely normal after the first surgical
removal of the pheochromocytoma.
Further support for this contention is
derived from the ten-year survival
after the original diagnosis and the
lack of extension of the supposed
malignant neoplasm beyond the con¬
fines of the liver during this period.
Although there are reported cases

of a single tumor
blastomatous and
matous

containing neuropheochromocyto-

elements,57 the

occurrence

of

separate tumors in a single patient, to

knowledge, has not been previous¬
ly described. Neuroblastomas are ca¬
pable of maturing into ganglioneuromas; however, to our knowledge, this
lesion similarly has not occurred as a
our

separate

tumor in association with a

pheochromocytoma either
same

person

or

in the
in different members

of the same family. Neuroblastoma,
ganglioneuroma, and pheochromocy¬
toma have been independently associ¬
ated with von Recklinghausen's dis¬
ease, albeit rarely. A single case

report has detailed the coexistence of

neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma
in a child with von Recklinghausen's
disease without a pheochromocyto¬
ma.8 Our patient had both a neuro¬
blastoma and a pheochromocytoma
without evidence of neurofibromatosis.
Pheochromocytoma has been asso¬
ciated with other heritable con¬
ditions, including the von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and multiple
endocrine neoplasia syndromes. As
many as 20% of patients with the von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome may have
renal cell carcinoma. In an investiga¬
tion of nine families with 50 subjects
affected with this syndrome, none
had both tumors.9 Sporadic cases of
pheochromocytoma and renal cell
carcinoma, not associated with the
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, have
been rarely reported.10 Pheochromo¬
cytoma associated with multiple en¬
docrine neoplasia is almost invariably
associated with medullary thyroid
carcinoma. Our patient and her
immediate family were not found to
harbor any lesion consistent with the
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome nor of
the endocrine neoplasia syndromes.
Despite the absence of a family
history of tumors, our patient seems
to fit the hereditary subgroup of
neural crest tumors as defined by
Knudson and Strong,3 because she
had (1) an early age of onset of the
pheochromocytoma, which initially
appeared on the side opposite the
neuroblastoma, (2) the probable pres¬
ence of multifocal pheochromocytoma
when initially operated on, and (3)
multifocal renal cell carcinoma.
Since the patient's renal cell carci¬
noma occurred in the radiation field
used for treatment of her neuroblas-

Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Reprints Desk User on 03/01/2016

previously, the possi¬
bility exists that the hypernephroma
toma 21 years
was

the result of radiation-induced

oncogenesis, similar to the situation
increasingly reported with other em¬
bryonal tumors."12 Radiotherapy may
locally potentiate an already existing
oncogenic tendency, as in patients

with retinoblastoma who have a
much higher incidence of secondary

neoplasms (particularly osteosarcoma), the majority but not all of which
occur

in the irradiated field.12 In this

regard it is of interest that virtually
all retinoblastoma patients with dis¬
tant osteosarcomas have a positive
family history of retinoblastoma or

have bilateral retinal tumors, which
in the experience of most workers in
the field implies a genetic form of the
disease, even in the absence of a posi¬
tive family history."
Whether the findings in this pa¬
tient represent a rare coincidence or
an inherent tissue-specific predisposi¬
tion remains unknown at present. As
therapy for neuroblastoma improves,
detailed observation of long-term sur¬
vivors will be of considerable inter¬
est.
This study was supported in part by grant
RR-828 from the General Clinical Resources
Centers Program of the Division of Research
Resources, National Institutes of Health.
References
1. Pearse AGE, Polak JM: Endocrine tumors
of neural crest origin. Med Biol 52:3-18,1974.
2. LaBrosse EH, Comoy E, Bohuon C, et al:
Catecholamine metabolism in neuroblastoma. J
Natl Cancer Inst 57:633-638, 1976.
3. Knudson AG, Strong LC: Mutation and
cancer: Neuroblastoma and pheochromocytoma.
Am J Hum Genet 24:514-532, 1972.
4. Schimke RN: Embryonal tumors, in Genetics and Cancer in Man. Edinburgh, Churchill

Livingstone, 1978, p 21.
5. Fernando PB, Cooray GH, Thanabalasundram RS: Adrenal pheochromocytoma with

neuroblastomatous elements: A report of a case
with autopsy. Arch Pathol 52:182-188, 1951.
6. Wahl HR, Robinson DW: Neuroblastoma of
the mediastinum with pheochromoblastomatous
elements. Arch Pathol 35:571-578, 1943.
7. Dawson DW, Tapp E: A compound tumour
of the adrenal medulla. J Pathol 97:231-233,
1969.
8. Knudson AG, Amromin GD: Neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma in a child with multiple
neurofibromatosis. Cancer 19:1032-1037, 1966.
9. Horton WA, Wong V, Eldridge R: Von
Hippel-Lindau disease. Arch Intern Med 136:769\x=req-\
777, 1976.
10. Nance EP, Ekelund L, Goncharenko V, et
al: Pheochromocytoma and ipsilateral renal cell
carcinoma diagnosed by angiography. Am J
Roentgenol 130:553-555, 1978.
11. Li FP: Second malignant tumors after
cancer in childhood. Cancer 40:1899-1902,1977.
12. Meadows AT, D'Angio GJ, Mike V, et al:
Patterns of second malignant neoplasms in children. Cancer 40:1903-1911, 1977.

