Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 1978, 41, 140-149

Progressive myoclonus and epilepsy with dentatorubral
degeneration: a clinicopathological study of the
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
T. D. BIRD AND C. M. SHAW
From the Departments of Medicine and Pathology, Divisions of Neurology, Medical Genetics, and
Neuropathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, and the Seattle Veterans
Administration Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA

SUMMARY Ramsay Hunt's progressive myoclonus and epilepsy associated with dentatorubral
degeneration is a rare disorder. We report a 19 year old woman with this clinical syndrome wlho
also has a more mildly affected brother. Neuropathological examination of the young woman
showed spinocerebellar and cerebral cortical degeneration in addition to dentatorubral involvement. The evidence suggests that this is a distinctive hereditary disorder producing neuronal
degeneration at several levels in the central nervous system.

Progressive myoclonic cerebellar dyssynergia with
epilepsy is an uncommon clinical syndrome with
multiple causes. Harriman and Millar (1955)
divide progressive familial myoclonic epilepsy into
three categories. The first is a relatively uniform
group associated with intracellular inclusions
(Lafora bodies), and the second is associated with
various cerebral lipidoses. The third category is a
heterogeneous group of nonspecific degenerative
diseases which include dyssynergia cerebellaris
myoclonica of Ramsay Hunt. This syndrome has
also been called dentatorubral degeneration based
on the postmortem findings of the case reported
by Hunt (1921). Subsequent reports of Ramsay
Hunt's dentatorubral degeneration with pathological confirmation are scarce. We have evaluated
a patient who seems to belong to this variety of
progressive myoclonic epilepsy. The rarity and
unusual nature of the syndrome justify documentation of the clinical and pathological details
of this patient. In addition, other members of her
family have possibly associated neurological
findings which will also be described.
Supported in part by grants NS01561-01, GM13543-21 and
HD02274-11 from the National Institutes of 14ealth, US Public
1-fealth Service.
Address for correspondence and reprint requests: Thomas D. Bird,
MD, Division of Neurology, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
Accepted 29 August 1977

140

Clinical summary
The patient had a normal birth and development,
and was an average student. At age 15 years she
developed an awkward gait, clumsy hand coordination, and deteriorating school work. She
soon developed nocturnal seizure activity, and an
EEG revealed irregular runs of 4-5 Hz moderate
voltage activity over the occipital areas, with
bilateral spike discharges in these same regions.
She was placed on anticonvulsant drugs and six
months later began to complain of dull frontal
headache.
Neurological examination at this time showed
marked horizontal nystagmus on lateral gaze to
either side, dysarthria, slight dysmetria on fingerto-nose and heel-to-shin testing, poor rapid
alternating movements with the left hand, ataxic
gait, and a fine tremor of the head and hands.
Deep tendon reflexes were normal and plantar
responses were downgoing. Unusually high arched
feet were noted.
Cerebrospinal fluid contained 11.2 g/l protein,
3.3 mmol/l (60 mg/dl) sugar, one mononuclear
cell per mm3, and negative VDRL. Skull radiographs, pneumoencephalogram, and brain scan
were normal. She was treated with a combination
of mephobarbitone, diphenylhydantoin, and
ethosuximide.
Three months later deep tendon reflexes were

Progressive myoclonus and epilepsy with dentatorubral degeneration

absent in both lower extremities and vibratory
sensation was decreased in both feet. Visual fields
and acuity were normal. An EEG demonstrated
epileptiform discharges, predominantly over the
left central and posterior regions. Repeat cerebrospinal fluid findings were unchanged and CSF
protein electrophoresis was normal.
One year after the onset of symp'oms the
tremor and incoordination of her right hand had
increased and she complained of visual blurring.
Examination revealed that she was oriented and
coherent, but her fund of general knowledge and
calculations were impaired. Pupillary light reactions were normal. She now had vertical jerk
nystagmus in addition to a worsening of her ataxic
gait, dysmetria, and vibratory and position sensory
deficits. Plantar reflexes remained downgoing. She
had "jerky twitches" of her head and upper
extremities that were described as both myoclonus
and asterixis (sudden involuntary flexion,
especially of the outstretched hands). Her EEG
had deteriorated with posterior slow waves and
diffuse epileptiform activity, worse on the left.
Her verbal IQ was 85, performance IQ 71, and
full scale IQ 77. The following tests were normal:
serum sodium and potassium, complete blood
count, blood sugar, blood urea nitrogen, total
serum bilirubin, serum glutamic oxalacetic transaminase, serum ceruloplasmin, slit lamp exam.nation of the eyes, urine amino acid screen, ECG,
rectal biopsy, and urine porphyrins. There were
no metachromatic granules in the urine. Ulnar,
median, and peroneal motor nerve conduction
velocities were normal but that of the posterior
tibial nerve was slightly slow (39 m/s).
The patient's disease showed a slow but relentless progression. Three years after the onset of
symptoms she remained alert and oriented, but
her mental capacity had deteriorated. She
developed severe myoclonic jerking movements
and dysmetria of all limbs. The myoclonic jerks
included small twitches of individual muscles as
well as sudden larger movements of a whole limb.
They were often asymmetrical with the right side
more involved. This jerking was worse with
stimulation and movement, and decreased with
rest and lethargy. There was no close correlation
between the jerking of the limbs and the abnormal
EEG activity. Plantar reflexes remained downgoing. Her visual acuity was poor (20/160), and
she could only identify moving hands. She had a
right homonymous hemianopsia. Optic fundi and
pupillary reflexes were normal. Optokinetic
nystagmus was deficient in all directions but best
with the stimulus moving toward her right. An
EEG showed occipital delta activity, left more

141

than right. Her generalised seizures were not well
controlled with multiple anticonvulsants.
Four years after the onset of symptoms she
was completely bedridden and hardly able to
carry on a meaningful conversation. She had a
sudden respiratory arrest and was admitted to
hospital in coma without response to painful
stimuli. She required intermittent assisted ventilation which maintained her arterial blood gases
and pH within the normal range. Frequent myoclonic jerks of face and all extremities continued.
She died six weeks after admission, aged 19 years.

Pathological findings
General necropsy findings included severe chronic
bronchitis, moderately severe interstitial pneumonitis, severe acute and chronic cystitis, inspissated
secretion of the tracheobronchial tree, and
gingival hyperplasia. There was no evidence of a
cardiomyopathy.

Fig. 1 Coronal section of the right parieto-occipital
lobe showing cortical necrosis (arrows).

T. D. Bird and C. M. Shau

142
GROSS BRAIN FINDINGS

The fresh brain weighed 1200 grams. The convolutional pattern of the cerebral hemispheres
was normal but the sulci were slightly widened
and the gyri were slightly narrow. The lateral
ventricles were mildly enlarged. On a cut surface
there were multifocal cortical lesions showing
thinning of the cortex with dark brown discolouration and granularity (Fig. 1). These lesions
were most marked in the medial and inferior
occipital cortices, parietal cortex, inferior frontal
and superior temporal gyri, more marked on the
left side. The substantia nigra was pale. The
cerebellum was moderately atrophic and sclerotic.
Multiple blocks from representative parts of the

cerebrum, cerebellum, and brainstem were eMbedded in paraffin, stained with haematoxylin and
eosin, Nissl, Luxol-fast blue-periodic acid-Schiffhaematoxylin, and Holmes' axon and Holzer glial
fibre methods. Samples were also taken from
various areas, fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde in
cacodylate buffer and processed for electron
microscopic studies.
MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION

Cerebrum Multifocal lesions of the cerebral
cortex were found to be much more extensive
than those noted in the gross examination, and
were of various degrees of severity. In a typical
lesion, the whole thickness of the cortex was re-

Fig. 2 Microscopic section of
cerebral cortex with marked
cortical necrosis (A). Higher
magnification (B) shows cortical
atrophy with neuronal loss,
capillary and glial proliferation,
and spongy degeneration of the
subcortical white matter.
LFB-PA S-H stain.

A
.2. X0't2
4
~
~
~

f,v-,P
44

~

~

~

~

9

A

j

~

~

~~'

s. S:.fi->,yeU . <f,:X

S.IvgtiMEFjBDds§UPK|SaBw.iI,l|PjztWvvtya40s.jsHOir)t'ts*v4

Progressive myoclonus and epilepsy with dentatorubral degeneration

K
Sif /t (Lv
}r
M i || |I 7

| 1E | '
zZostc?o6*

*4s. t Si4 <.* 4%
'&-.

}v<v .:/%

placed by proliferated capillaries and hypertrophic
astrocytes (Fig. 2). The deeper layers were more
severely affected. Randomly scattered shrunken
neurones were present in the deeper cortex but
more neurones were usually preserved in layers
II and III. Small vacuoles were scattered in the
lesion or formed rows in layer II. Large areas of
spongy degeneration were frequently present in
the white matter immediately underneath the
cortical lesion (Fig. 2). In the more severely
affected cortex, hypertrophic astrocytes decreased
in number with the relative increase of capillaries
and the cortex became thin and loose with wavy
ill-defined spaces. Neurones were absent. In the
less severely involved cortex, focal accumulations
of hypertrophic astrocytes were present with
relatively focal neuronal loss. In all lesions gitter
cells were infrequently found. The hippocampus
and adjacent temporal cortex were spared on both
sides but eosinophilic rod-like structures were
found sporadically in the hippocampus. Electron
microscopic studies showed these rods to be
densely fibrillar structures similar to those
described by Hirano et al. (1968) in Guamanian
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinsonismdementia complex (Fig. 3). However, Alzheimer's
neurofibrillary change, senile plaques, and
granulovacuolar change were not found in the
same regions.

143

Fig. 3 Electron microscopic
photographs of a rod-like body
found in the hippocampus
(X 13000).

fOzy-N

i _

., *

^

s sS

*4^ t.>S

tw;

Basal ganglia The lenticular nuclei were normal.
Focal spongy degeneration, neuronal loss and
astrocytic proliferation similar to the cortical
lesions were present in the dorsolateral thalamus.

Cerebellum The loss of Purkinje cells and Bergmann's gliosis were marked and widespread. The
granular cells were also lost but more focally. The
subcortical white matter was diffusely pale and
mildly spongy. The dentate nucleus was markedly
atrophic with diffuse neuronal loss and glial and
capillary proliferation (Fig. 4). Only a few
shrunken neurones were scattered among astrocytes and capillaries.
Brainstem There was moderate to marked degree
of neuronal loss and corresponding gliosis in the
substantia nigra, red nucleus, locus coeruleus, and
inferior olives. Extracellular melanin pigment
and its phagocytosis were evident in both substantia nigra and locus coeruleus. The brachium
conjunctivum was atrophic and pale in the
mesencephalon (Fig. 5A, B), and also in the
rostral pontine level (Fig. 5C, D). Marked degeneration with focal accumulation of gitter cells
was noted in the brachium conjunctivum at the
mid pons level.

Spinal cord Marked degeneration of the dorsal

144

~ ;.~ ~ .
.~~
~~
~~
~~
~~

~~

~~

~~

~~

~~

T. D. Bird and C. M. Shaw

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

.f.o

..
..~~~~

.:.~*~

..

..

h

Fig. 4 Low power
magnification of the dentate
nucleus shows atrophy with
marked neuronal loss. capillary
proliferation, and gliosis (A),
compared with a normal
control (B). LFB-PA S-H stain
with both specimens at the
same magnification.

., .. ..'.
.~~~
~~ ~ ~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
....

*

*

.
~
~
~
~

~

.. ..
...

..
~~~~
.
~
....
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..

column was noted in the lumbar segments. The
degeneration of the dorsal column was limited
to Goll's tract in the thoracic and cervical levels
where the spinocerebellar tracts were also noted
to be degenerated (Fig. 6A, B). Neurones were
sparse in Clarke's nucleus. The corticospinal tracts
were spared. Dorsal roots in the cauda equina
were diffusely fibrotic with marked loss of myelinated fibres. Only one spinal sensory ganglion
from the lumbar region was available, showing cell
loss and interstitial fibrosis.
No Lafora bodies were seen in the central
nervous

-system.

Family history
The patient's father is of

German

ancestry, the

mother of Norwegian descent, and they are unrelated. The father is living and well at age 48
years, and has had no seizures or other neurological problems. We have been unable to examine
him. The 46 year old mother is healthy, has had
no seizures, and has no neurological deficits on
detailed examination. She has no pes cavus deformity. Her EEG shows a small amount of theta
activity in the left temporal region and is otherwise unremarkable. Sensory and motor nerve conduction velocities in her upper and lower extremities are normal. She has abnormally decreased
amplitudes of evoked responses (2-3 mV) from
both peroneal nerves. The patient's 23 year old
brother is living and well, and has a normal
neurological examination.
The patient's younger brother was normal until

Progressive myoclonus and epilepsy with dentatorubral degeneration

145

B

-W

Fig. 5 Sections of the midbrain (A,B) and rostral pons (C.D) show marked pallor and gliosis of the
brachium conjunctivum and red nucleus. Medial lemniscus and spinothalanmic tracts are also involved
(C.D). LFB-PAS-H stain (A.C) and Holzer stain (B,D).

age 14 years when he developed a fine tremor of
his hands and was noted to drop dishes at home.
Neurological examination at the age of 17 years
revealed a fine tremulousness of outstretched
hands, mild pes cavus deformity, absent deep tendon reflexes, horizontal nystagmus on lateral
gaze, and a loss of vibratory and position sensation
in both feet. Plantar reflexes were downgoing. He
has had no intellectual change, ataxia, dysarthria,
seizures, or myoclonus. Electromyography showed
giant motor unit potentials in the extensor digitorum brevis muscle. Ulnar and median motor
nerve conduction velocities were in the borderline
range but peroneal nerve conduction velocity (33
m/s) and distal latency (7.9 ms) were abnormal.
Sural and median sensory nerve conduction
velocities could not be obtained after considerable
effort. His EEG was markedly abnormal with
bilateral bursts of 3 Hz waves posteriorly and a
moderate amount of 3-7 Hz arrhythmic activity
over all regions bilaterally. There were sharp
transients but no epileptiform activity. This EEG

is almost identical to an early tracing from his
sister. Urine amino acid screen was negative on
this man, his mother, and his brother.
A maternal uncle of the patient has had lifelong jerking of his eyes, and was born with a
strabismus that resolved spontaneously. Neurological examination at age 62 years was remarkable only for a quick oscillating horizontal
movement of his eyes on forward gaze which was
not made worse by eye movements. Retinae, optic
discs, and maculae were normal. He had no
history of seizures or myoclonus.
Another 48 year old maternal uncle had
moderate nonprogressive mental retardation of
unknown cause without seizures. He had no
ataxia, tremor, sensory deficits or myoclonus.
Deep tendon reflexes were normal with downgoing
plantar reflexes. Rapid alternating movements
were clumsy. There were a few beats of rotary
nystagmus on right lateral gaze. His EEG was
normal.

146

T. D. Bird and C. M. Shaw

ob.

WL
IBM&.

NW

I

'-V:.

at.

-'kl

A

Fig. 6 Sections of the cervical
cord (A) and thoracic cord (B)
show degeneration of Goll's
tract and spinocerebellar tract.
LFB-PA S-H stain.

_

.4,

Discussion
In 1914 Ramsay Hunt reported three patients with
a slowly progressive intention tremor and other
evidence of cerebellar disease under the title
"dyssynergia cerebellaris progressiva". No necropsy study was available at the time, but it was
thought that the primary lesion was in the efferent dentate system. One of these patients came to
necropsy some years later and was diagnosed as
having Wilson's disease (Whittier, 1952). Critchley
(1962) reported three additional cases of dyssynergia cerebellaris progressiva. The pathological
findings in one of his cases included degeneration
of dentatorubrothalamic pathways, subfrontal
white matter, spinocerebellar, spinothalamic,
spinotectal and rubrospinal tracts.
In 1921 Ramsay Hunt reported six additional
patients under the title "dyssynergia cerebellaris
myoclonica-primary atrophy of the dentate system". This report actually described two groups
of patients. The first group consisted of four unrelated persons with progressive dysarthria, intention tremor, dysmetria, and myoclonus epilepsy.

They had no clinical evidence of spinal cord involvement and no postmortem studies. The second
group consisted of one set of twin brothers (both
affected) who, in addition to progressive cerebellar
symptoms beginning in adolescence, also had myoclonus, epilepsy, depressed deep tendon reflexes,
sensory loss in the feet, and pes cavus deformity.
One of the brothers, who had signs of mental impairment, died at age 36 years. Neuropathological
study showed atrophy of the dentate nucleus,
degeneration of the superior cerebellar peduncle,
degeneration of the posterior columns and
Clarke's nucleus and the spinocerebellar tracts.
The long motor (pyramidal) tracts were not involved. The cerebral cortex, red nucleus, cranial
nerve nuclei, and inferior olives were normal.
Ramsay Hunt described the twins as having "dyssynergia cerebellaris myoclonica associated with
Friedreich's ataxia". The syndrome was later
named "the Ramsay Hunt syndrome" by Greenfield (1954) but also known as dentatorubral
degeneration.
Dentatorubral degeneration is a neuropathological diagnosis since the clinical syndrome of

Progressive myoclonus and epilepsy wvith dentatorubral degeneration

progressive myoclonus epilepsy is nonspecific and
can be produced by numerous disorders, such as
Lafora body myoclonic epilepsy, cerebral lipidoses, Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, and even hypoxic
encephalopathy. Even so, such pathological confirmations are meagre and controversial. There
has not been a reported case with only dentatorubral degeneration. The few cases described include
other lesions in the brainstem (Hanel and Bielschowski, and Louis-Bar and van Bogaert, both
cited by Greenfield, 1954; dc Barsy et al., 1968),
in the basal ganglia (Titica and van Bogaert, 1946;
Andre-van Leeuwen and van Bogaert, 1949), and
in the spinal cord as in the original case of
Ramsay Hunt. Netsky (1968) considers these reported cases to be variants of either Friedreich's
ataxia or olivopontocerebellar degeneration. In reviewing the literature on the Ramsay Hunt syndrome we also have found difficulties in defining
this entity precisely.
The dentatorubral degeneration and spinal cord
lesions in our patient closely resemble the findings
in the single patient studied morphologically by
Ramsay Hunt in 1921. Our patient differs from
that of Ramsay Hunt in showing extensive cerebral cortical degeneration and degeneration in the
thalamus, substantia nigra, locus coeruleus,
inferior olive, and subcortical white matter. We
initially interpreted the cortical lesion as being
secondary to hypoxia because the patient had a
respiratory arrest followed by frequent seizure
activity six weeks before her death. We recognise
that many observers would favour such an explanation. However, the evidence supporting the
cerebral cortical lesion as a part of the primary
disease is intriguing and compelling, and we favour
this interpretation for the following reasons:
1. The lesion in the cerebral cortex in the present
case is different from the usual hypoxic cortical
necrosis or pseudolaminar necrosis in several
aspects. There is practically no cystic necrosis and
there are no gitter cells present in spite of evidence of a marked neuronal loss. The presence
of randomly preserved neurones in the lesions is
also against ischaemic necrosis. The number of
hypertrophic astrocytes present in the cortex is
disproportionately large. This histological lesion
resembles more the degenerative process noted in
other areas, such as the dentate nucleus and inferior olive. Although the cerebral cortical lesion
is diffuse, it spares the inferior temporal cortex
and hippocampus. This pattern is more characteristic of primary neuronal disorders, such as poliodystrophy cerebralis progressiva (Alper's disease)

than of cerebral hypoxia.

147

2. The clinical presentation of the disease in this
family includes early progressive intellectual deterioration before the respiratory arrest in the
patient, and a markedly abnormal EEG in her
affected brother who has not had seizures. The
left sided preponderance of the cortical lesion in
the patient also correlates with her EEG findings
and right visual field defect.
3. Our case does not represent an isolated observation of cerebral cortical degeneration associated with familial progressive myoclonus epilepsy
and dentatorubral degeneration. Similar findings
have been reported by Haltia et al. (1969) and
Skre and Loken (1970, case 3). The siblings reported by Morse (1949) may also represent this
association.
4. Other authors have noted that focal cerebral
cortical necrosis may result from persistent focal
seizure activity associated with hypoxaemia that
is not severe enough to produce similar damage
elsewhere (Knopman et al., 1977), demonstrating
that an underlying disorder of neurones may
sometimes make an important contribution to the
final neuropathological changes.
Based on our patient and other similar cases in
the literature, we propose that dentatorubral
degeneration represents the variable expression
of a multifocal progressive neuronal disorder such
as occurs in poliodystrophy cerebralis progressiva.
The spinal cord lesions represent Wallerian degeneration from death of spinal sensory ganglia and
Clarke's neurones. Degeneration of cerebral cortical neurones may or may not accompany degeneration of the dentate nucleus which was so
prominent in the original case of Ramsay Hunt.
The extensive loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells
could be a result of hypoxia, chronic phenytoin
intoxication, part of the primary disease process,
or a combination of these factors.
The Hirano bodies found in the hippocampus by electron microscopy are nonspecific
changes that have been described in various degenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease,
Parkinsonism-dementia complex, Down's syndrome, and others (Hirano et al., 1968). However,
they have not been found in patients as young as
this, and are unusual to be found independent of
other senile changes. Degeneration of other brain
stem structures, such as the red nucleus, substantia nigra, and inferior olives (as seen in our
case), has been reported in other patients (Curcio
and Pedace, 1955; Christophe and Gruner, 1956;
Yokoi et al., 1965; de Barsy et al., 1968; Haltia
et al., 1969).

148

The family history of this patient is of considerable interest. Her 17 year old brother undoubtedly
has the same disease, presently manifesting as
absent deep tendon reflexes, pes cavus, tremulousness, mild nystagmus, decreased appreciation of
vibration and position, and abnormal nerve conduction studies. His EEG is markedly abnormal
and similar to his sister's. In such families the
EEG may be a useful early indicator of the presence of the disease. Whether this young man will
have a deteriorating clinical course remains to be
seen.
No other member of this family has had a
disorder similar to that of the two siblings. We
conclude that this is likely to be an autosomal recessive degenerative disease, probably reflecting
an inborn error of metabolism. It should be noted
that both Lafora body myoclonic epilepsy and
classical Friedreich's ataxia are also autosomal
recessive disorders. It is possible that the mild
nerve conduction abnormalities in the mother,
the uncle's retardation, and the other uncle's
nystagmus are mild manifestations of the
recessive gene in heterozygote carriers. On the
other hand, these findings could be coincidental
and unrelated. A less likely possibility is that this
disease is an autosomal dominant disorder with
highly variable expressivity. Other reports of the
Ramsay Hunt syndrome have included family
pedigrees consistent with both autosomal recessive
(Christophe and Gruner, 1956; Noad and Lance,
1960; Skre and Loken, 1970) and dominant inheritance (Franceschetti et al., 1954; Kreindler et al.,
1959; de Barsy et al., 1968; Ziegler et al., 1974),
reflecting the heterogeneity of this syndrome.
The identity of Ramsay Hunt's dyssynergia cerebellaris myoclonica remains controversial because
of the scarcity of necropsied cases, the extensive
overlapping of clinical manifestations with other
disorders, and the nonspecific nature of myoclonus
and epilepsy (Watson and Denny-Brown, 1953;
Swanson et al., 1962).
The report by Ramsay Hunt (1921) of affected
twin boys implies that they had two diseases:
Friedreich's ataxia and dentatorubral degeneration.
(It should be noted that neither the twins described by Ramsay Hunt nor our present patient
had the corticospinal tract lesions found in classical Friedreich's ataxia.) We contend that those
twin brothers and our present patient represent a
single hereditary disorder producing primary
neuronal degeneration in several levels of the
nervous system. We believe Ramsay Hunt's syndrome is a specific clinicopathological disorder
whose clinical features include childhood or
adolescent onset, familial occurrence, progressive

T. D. Bird and C. M. Shaw

deterioration, myoclonic jerks, ataxia, epilepsy,
abnormal electroencephalogram, hypoactive deep
tendon reflexes, and diminished position and vibratory sensation. The neuropathological findings
include dentatorubral and spinocerebellar degeneration associated with cortical neuronal degeneration in advanced cases. The presence of progressive
intellectual deterioration and seizures, the consistently elevated CSF protein, the lack of long
motor tract involvement and the absence of cardiomyopathy and scoliosis make our present
patient different from typical Friedreich's ataxia
(Geoffroy et al., 1976).
The Muscular Dystrophy Association aided the
study of this family and Dr Robert Wilkus reviewed the electroencephalograms. Dr J. T.
Robson examined one of the family members.
References

Andre-van Leeuwen, M.. and van Bogaert, L. (1949).
Hereditary ataxia with optic atrophy of the retrobulbar neuritis type and latent pallido-Luysian
degeneration. Brain, 72, 340-363.
Christophe, J., and Gruner, J. (1956). La dyssynergie
cerebelleuse myoclonique de Ramsay Hunt. Revue
Neurologique. 95, 297-309.
Critchley, M. (1962). Dyssynergia cerebellaris progressiva. Transactions of the A merican Neurological
Association, 87, 81-85.
Curcio, F. I., and Pedace, E. A. (1955). Disinergia
cerebelosa mioclonica. A cta Neuropsiquiatrica
Argentina. 1, 327-341.
de Barsy, T., Myle, G., Troch, C., Matthys, R., and
Martin. J. J. (1968). La dyssynergie cerebelleuse
myoclonique (R. Hunt): affection autonome ou
variante du type degeneratif de l'epilepsie-myoclonie
(Unverricht-Lundborg)
approache
progressive
anatomo-clinique. Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 8, 111-127.
Franceschetti, A., Klein, D., and Willener, H.
(1954). Dyssynergie cerebelleuse myoclonique progressive (Ramsay-Hunt) a transmission dominante
dans une famille bernoise. Schweitzer Archives fur
Neurologie und Psychiatrie, 74, 419-423.
Geoffroy, G., Barbeau, A., Breton, G., Lemieux, B.,
Aube, M., Leger, C., and Bouchard, J. P. (1976).
Clinical description and roentgenologic evaluation
of patients with Friedreich's ataxia. Le Journal
Canadien des Sciences Neurologiques, 3, 279-286.
Greenfield, J. G. (1954). The Spino-cerebellar Degenerations. Charles C. Thomas: Springfield, Illinois.
Haltia, M., Kristensson, K.. and Sourander, P. (1969).
Neuropathological studies in three Scandinavian
cases of progressive myoclonus epilepsy. A cta
Neurologica Scandinavica, 45, 63-77.
Harriman, D. G. F., and Millar, J. H. D. (1955).
Progressive familial myoclonic epilepsy in three

Progressive myoclonus and epilepsy with dentatorubral degeneration
families: its clinical features and pathological basis.
Brain, 78, 325-349.
Hirano, A., Dembitzer, H. M.. Kurland, L. T.. and
Zimmerman, H. M. (1968). The fine structure of
some intraganglionic alterations. Neurofibrillary
tangles, granulovacuolar bodies and "rod-like"
structures as seen in Guam amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis and parkinsonian-dementia complex. Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology, 27, 167-182.
Hunt, J. R. (1914). Dyssynergia cerebellaris progressiva-a chronic progressive form of cerebellar
tremor. Brain, 37, 247-268.
Hunt, J. R. (1921). Dyssynergia cerebellaris myoclonica primary atrophy of the dentate system: a
contribution to the pathology and symptomatology
of the cerebellum. Brain. 44, 490-538.
Knopman, D., Margolis, G.. and Reeves, A. G. (1977).
Prolongecl focal epilepsy and hypoxemia as a cause
of focal brain damage: a case study. A nnals of
Neurology. 1, 195-198.
Kreindler, A., Crighel, E., and Poilici, I. (1959).
Clinical and electroencephalographic investigations
in myoclonic cerebellar dyssynergia. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery. and Psychiatry, 22, 232237.
Morse, W. I. (1949). Hereditary myoclonus epilepsytwo cases with pathological findings. Bulletin of the
Johns Hopkins Hospital. 84, 116-130.
Netsky, M. G. (1968). Degenerations of the cerebellum and its pathways. In Pathology of the Ner-

149

vous System, Volume I. pp. 1163-1185. Edited by
J. Minckler. McGraw-Hill: New York.
Noad, K. B., and Lance, J. W. (1960). Familial myoclonic epilepsy and its association with cerebellar
disturbance. Brain. 83, 618-630.
Skre. H., and Loken, A. C. (1970). Myoclonus epilepsy
and subacute presenile (lementia in heredo-ataxia.
Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, 46, 18-42.
Swanson, P. D., Luttrell, C. N., and Magladery. J. W.
(1962). Myoclonus-a report of 67 cases and review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore), 41,
339-356.
Titica, J.. and van Bogaert. L. (1946). Heredodegenerative hemiballismus. A contribution to the
question of primary atrophy of the corpus Luysii.
Brain, 69, 251-263.
Watson, C. W., and Denny-Brown, D. (1953). Myoclonus epilepsy as a symptom of diffuse neuronal
disease. A rchives of Neurology and Psychiatry
(Chicago), 70, 151-168.
Whittier, J. R. (1952). The graphic study of ballism
and related hyperkinesia. Journal of Neuropathology
and Experimental Neurology, 11, 300-316.
Yokoi, S., Kobori. H., and Yoshihara, H. (1965).
Clinical and neuropathological studies of myoclonic
epilepsy. Acta Neuropathologica, 4, 370-379.
Ziegler, D. K., Van Speybroech, N. W.. and Seitz,
E. F. (1974). Myoclonic epilepsia partialis continua
and Friedreich ataxia. A rchives of Neurology
(Chicago). 31, 308-31 1.

