Late-Onset Metachromatic Leukodystrophy:
Molecular Pathology in Two Siblings
Joachim Kappler, M D , Kurt von Figura, M D , and Volkmar Gieselmann, M D

We report on a new allele at the arylsulfatase A. (ARSA) locus causing late-onset metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD).
In that allele arginine", a residue that is highdy conserved in the arylsulfatase gene family, is replaced by glutamine.
In contrast to alleles that cause early-onset MLD, the arginines4 to glutamine substitution is associated with some
residual ARSA activity. A comparison of genotypes, ARSA activities, and clinical data on 4 individuals carrying the
allele of 81 patients with MLD examined, further validates the concept that different degrees of residual ARSA activity
are the basis of phenotypical variacion in MLD.
Kappler J, von Figura K, Gieselmann V. Late-onset metachromatic ieukodystrophy:
molecular pathology in two siblings. Ann Neurol 1002;3 1:250-20 I

Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is a recessively
inherited demyelinating disease caused by deficiency
of arylsulfatase A {ARSA), a lysosomal enzyme that
hydrolyzes cerebroside sulfate (sulfatide). Because sulfatide is mainly present in myelin, the metabolic block
of ARSA leads to lysosomal storage of sulfatitle in oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells, bringing about severe demyelination (for review, see { 11). T h e three
clinical forms of the disease (late-infantile, juvenile,
and adult) are due to different levels of residual enzyme activity {2, 31. These are explained by the existence of alleles without any function (type 0 alleles)
and alleles associated with some residual activity (type
R). Patients who are homozygous for type 0 alleles
(genotype, 010) have total lack of ARSA activity and
suffer from the most severe late-infantile form. Homozygotes for type R alleles (RIR) have a residual ARSA
activity that delays the storage process considerably; in
these individuals the onset of the disease is usually
beyond the age of 10 years (late-juvenile and adult
forms). T h e type O/ type R compound heterozygotes
have intermediate (juvenile) phenotypes. This model
has been corroborated at the molecular level by the
elucidation of four alleles, that is, one type R alllele [41
and three type 0 alleles {4-61. T w o of these alleles
comprise approximately 50!4 of all MLD alleles {41,
whereas the other alleles are found with frequencies
below 2.5%' among patients with MLD.
Moreover, there exists the ARSA pseudodefcciency
allele (PD; allele frequency 7-15c/c), with approximately 10% ARSA activity of the normal allele in fibroblasts 17,81. T h e mutations in this allele have been
revealed recently [8}. Individuals who are compound

heterozygotes of this allele and a MLD allele (OiPD
or R/PD) have 6 to 10C4 residual ARSA activity in
fibroblasts, but d o not develop MLD [i]. Thus, only
slightly higher ARSA activities than these encountered
in R / R genotypes ( 2 - 5 9 0 ['>I are sufficient t o sustain
a normal phenotype.
Here, we report on a girl with late-onset MLD (age
at onset, 14 years). Sequence analysis proved her to he
a compound heterotygote for the proline to leucine
type R allele (allele A described in [ 4 ] , and a previously unknown arginine8" to glutamine substitution,
also associated with some residual ARSA activity. Thc
clinical and biochemical data o n the index patient and
3 additional patients with MLD carrying the new allele further validate the pathogenetic model outlined
above.

From the Institut fur Biochemie 2, Gottingen, Germany.

Address correspondence to Dr Kappler, Institut fur Biochemie 2,
Gosslerstrasse 12d, D-3400 Giittingen, Germany.

Received J u n 27, 1991. Accepted for publication Jul 28, 1991.

256

I' '

Patients
The history of the index patient (B.B.) was reported earlier
19,101and is summarized here. When she was 1 4 years old.
the girl developed abnormal behavior that was diagnosed as
a frontal lobe syndrome. Later on she developed peripheral
neuropathy and dementia. At the age o f 30 years, the woman
was still alive in a bedridden state. The diagnosis was based
on the following findings: low ARSA activity in leukocytes,
elevated urinary sulfatide, lysosomal residual bodies in a sural
nerve specimen, and typical computed tomographic (C'T) alterations. ARSA activity determination and sulf;tr~dcloading
studies with fibroblasts confirmed the diagnosis 3 1.
A sister of the patient presented with similar biochemical
alterations [?}. In spite of cranial CT alterations (haracrerisric
of MLD, the clinical status was almost normal when s h e was
21 years old {lo]. At the age of 29 years, she was still without
complaints.

Copyright 0 1092 by the American Neurological Association

Methods
DNA Preparation and Polymerase Chain Reaction

Mutunt

QG

Wn
3

t

‘.I*.....

A

A

C

G

T

Genomic D N A was prepared from cultured fibroblasts from
the index patient (B.B.) as described {4].
The coding regions
of the ARSA gene were amplified in fragments of 1-kb and
2-kb length, respectively, using primers that carried restriction sites as described (fragments C and D, { 4 ] ;see Fig 1).
After cleavage with restriction endonucleases, fragments C
and D were ligated into the phage vectors M13 m p l 8 and
m p l 9 using standard techniques [ll]. The clones were analyzed for presence of the inserts using restriction enzyme
cleavage of double-stranded D N A from rninipreparations.
Single-stranded D N A was prepared from the clones that contained appropriate inserts.

D N A Sequencing
Clones that contained fragment C were screened for the prestransition (allele A, [ 4 ) )
ence of the c y ~ t e i n e * to
~ ~threonine
’
using D N A dideoxy sequencing [ 111. Two clones that had
the wild-type sequence at this position were selected for further sequencing. For analysis of fragment D, equal amounts
of single-stranded phage D N A isolated from five independent clones were pooled and sequenced. The coding sequence was determined in at least one direction except exon
3 and the first 10 bases in the 5’ terminus of exon 5 . When
an alteration from the wild-type sequence [ l 2 ] was noted,
several clones were reinvestigated independently at the position in question. Only mutations that could be observed in
at least two independent clones were considered further.

Differential Hybridization with Mutation-specific
Oligontlcleotides
Mutation-specific (noncoding) oligonucleotides were prepared on an Applied Biosystems D N A synthesizer. The
mutation-encompassing fragment A [4f(see Fig 1) was slotblotted onto nylon membranes (Hybond-N, Amersham,
Brannschweig, Germany) using a Schleicher and Schuell
(Dassel, Germany) minifold. Hybridization with 32P-labeled
oligonucleotides was performed overnight at 42°C. The filters were washed two times with 6 x standard saline citrate
(SSC) 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) at room temperature and for 10’ at 57°C with 6~ SSC 0.1% SDS followed
by autoradiography at - 70°C.

B
Fig 1 . (A)Atylsulfatase A gene structure, polymerase chain reaction fragments, and location of the argininP4 to glutamine
mutation. Boxes represent exons: filled parts represent translated
and open parts untranslated regions. Lines depict intronsc,and
triangles potential glycosylation sites. ATG m d T G A are the
initiation codon and termination codon, respectively. A , C , and
D are the fragments that were amplified. A n arrow shows the
location of the mutation. Arg = arginine; Gln = glutamine.
(BI Heterozygosity for a glycin$” t o alanine transition. Five
clones o f M 1 3 mpl9 containing fragment D were pooled and sequenced using the dideoxy chain termination method (independent analysis demonstrated two to carry the mutation, not
shown). Normal (no) and mutant (mu) allele sequences are
shown and translation into peptide sequence is given below.

In Vitro Mulctgenesis and Expression Studies
The mutant oligonucleotide was used to introduce the mutation into the ARSA cDNA 1131 according to the method of
Nakayame and Eckstein [141. Presence of the mutation was
verified by sequencing. The altered cDNA was subcloned
into the eukaryotic expression vector pBEH (1 51. Ten micrograms of plasmid were used to perform calcium phosphatemediated transfection with lo5 baby hamster kidney (BHK)
cells in 6-cm culture dishes. The cells were harvested after
48 hours, and analyzed for ARSA activity (131 and crossreacting material (CRM) as described {7}. Fibroblasts were
examined for ARSA activity, sulfatide-degrading capacity,
CRM, and effect of an inhibitor of thiol proteases (Ncarbobenzoxy-phe-ala-diazomethylketone)
as described [ 33.

Kappler et al: Late-Onset MLD

257

A

Aryisulfalase

4

A

o c l ~ v i l y lrnU/rngl

5

6

C

Cross

reock ing
material

Fig 2. Verification of the genotype using hybridization with
mutation-specifc oligonucleotides ( I :B.B., index patient.
marked with an arrouj; 2: M 13 mpl9 clone that carries
the mutation. markea' by an asterisk: 3: control: 4: S.O..
sicter of I ; 5 : no D N A ; 6: control. ( A )Genotype assignment,
presence of the arginin8' to glutamine mutation is indicated by bfack. present-t?ofargininB4 by white. (Bi Hybridization with the mutant inoncoding) oligonucleotrde ( 5 ' ATGCCCATCTGAACCGG-3'!.( C ) Hybridization
uith the wild-type lnoncodingi oligonucleotide (3'ATGCCCATCCGAACCGG-.?').

Results
Ident$cation of the Mutation
The ARSA gene of the index patient (B.B.) was amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in two
overlapping fragments of I-kb and 2-kb length, respectively (fragments C and D, see Fig I), which were
subcloned into the phage vectors M13 mp18 and mp19
and sequenced. We found two alterations from the
wild-type nucleocide sequence of ARSA. One was
the already known cysteine"" to threonine transition
(leading to the proline-'26 to leucine substitution 143).

258 Annals of Neurology

Vol 31

No 3 March 1992

Fig 3. EJfects of the argininex4 to gluturnine tranrition o n a?[suvatase A IARSA) expression. The wild-type and thr miitant
(generated by site-directed nzutagene.ci.cJ AKSA [DNA ii'assubcloned into the expression z'ectorpBEH, and thrn tramirntly
transfected t o baby hamster kidney cellr using the calcium phoiphute method. Afier 48 hourA-,cells were analyzed for ARSA activity and cross-reacting material. Ban shoun ARSA actiz,itie.i
(mean, range) in three independent experiments (topi. We.itern
blotting was pevformed concomitantly in one .set (if transjeitiom
(bottom). Arrow indicates position of human ARSA po4ypeptides. Plasmids transjicted: vector without insert ~negatiwcontrol) ( A ) ,pBEH with A R S A c D N A carrying the arginine'.' to
ghtumine mutation (B)$pBEH with ARSA udd-type [ D N A
(C).

The second mutation was a glycine25' to alanine transition (see Fig 1) that predicts an arginineu4t o glutamine
substitution.
To exclude the possibility that the mutation may be
an amplification artifact, hybridization with mutationspecific oligonucleotides was performed. A 1-kb fragment that contains the site of the mutation (fragment
A, see Fig 1; { 4 ] )was amplified using PCR from DNA
samples of the index patient (B.B.), her sister (S.O.),
and 2 healthy control subjects, and then slot-blotted

Comparison o f Genotype, and Biochemical and Clinical Data in the 4 Individuals Bearing the Argininea4to Glutamine Allele
Patient (origin)

Genotype

ARSA Activitya

Sulfatide Loading
Testb

B.B. (Germany)

R84-QIp42"L

2.1

30.7

S.O. (Germany)

RX4-Q/ p426-L

4.1

28.4

Y.N. (Israel)

R84-Ql?

1.3

35.0

S.S. (U.S.A.)

Rs4-Q/?

ND'

ND

Control subjects (range)

1. Wtiwt (n = 13)
2. MLDiPD (n = 6)
3. P42'J-LiP'L6-L(n = 5)

57-126
6-10
2.1-5.4

80- 108
22-72
3.4-9.3

Clinical Data
Late-juvenile MLD, onset at age 14 yr
Preclinical MLD at the
age of 21 yr (sister of
B.B.)
Adult MLD: gradual onset when attending
school, sharp deterioration at the age of
22 yr
Late-juvenile MLD, age
of onset 14 yr
...
...
...

Arylsulfatase A (ARSA) activity and the sulfatide loading test were performed as described (131, where values on SO., B.B., and control
subjects have been reported). All individuals have been screened for the metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) alleles that are known using
differential hybridization [4-61.
'ARSA activity was determined with para-nitrocatechol sulfate and is given here in percentage of normal control average.
bThe ratio sulfaride degradedlsulfacide uptake is given as percentage of normal control average.
'ARSA activity determination and the sulfatide loading test were performed according to a different protocol and are therefore omitted here.
Nevertheless, the results confirmed the diagnosis of MLD (DrA. L. Fluharty, personal communication).
R

=

arginine; Q

=

glutamine; P

=

proline; L = leucine; PD

=

pseudodeficiency; ! = unidentified MLD allele; ND = no data.

onto Hybond membranes. Plasmid D N A from an M13
clone bearing the mutation served as a positive control.
The hybridization proved that the index patient and
her sister were both heterozygous for the glycine"' to
alanine transition (Fig 2).
E f f t of the Arginines4 to Glutamine Transition on

ARSA Expression
To show that the arginines4 to glutamine substitution
does cause ARSA deficiency (and is not a neutral mutation), it was introduced into the ARSA cDNA using
in vitro mutagenesis. The mutated cDNA was subcloned into the eukaryotic expression vector pBEH
{15] and then used to transfect BHK cells in three
independent experiments. Cells transfected with the
wild-type cDNA expressed on average five- to sixfold
background activity, whereas the mutation resulted in
not more than 1.7-fold background activity (Fig 3, top).
Western blot analysis of cell homogenates revealed the
absence of CRM in cells transfected with the mutant
cDNA (see Fig 3, bottom). In fibroblasts from 1 individual carrying the allele (Y.N., Table), no significant
increase of CRM could be detected after treatment of
the cells with N-carbobenzoxy-phe-ala-diazomethylketone (Fig 4).
Frequency of the Mutation
among Patients with MLD
D N A of 81 patients with MLD was screened for the
arginineS4to glutamine substitution using hybridization

with mutation-specific oligonucleotides. Four individuals (the index patient, her sister, and 2 unrelated
individuals) proved to be heterozygous for the arginines4 to glutamine mutation, in 2 of whom (Y.N.
and S.S., see Table) the second MLD allele was different from the pr01ine~~'to leucine allele. In the Table,
the available information on the individuals is surveyed. Some of the data have been published already;
they are included to facilitate comparisons.
Discussion
The arginineg4 residue is one of the highly conserved
residues among the arylsulfatase family {16f. The replacement of that residue by glutamine does not lead
to the expression of detectable amounts of CRM after
transient expression. Consistently, when fibroblasts of
the index patient and her sister were examined by
Western blotting in a previous study, no CRM could
be detected [3]. Thus, the reduced activity seems due
to a reduced amount of protein, probably caused by
instability. It is likely that the presence of a positively
charged residue may be necessary for stability of arylsulfatases. Whereas the p r 0 1 i n e ~to
~ ~leucine allele responds effectively to the inhibition of thiol proteases
[4],however, no such effect was noted when fibroblasts from 1 individual who carried the arginine8* to
glutamine mutation, but not the proline4*' to leucine
substitution, were investigated, suggesting that a different pathway of protein breakdown is involved.
The arginines4 to glutamine substitution is associated

Kappler et al: Late-Onset MLD

259

l e ~ c i n e l p r o l i n eto~ leucine
~~
homozygotes, we guessed
that a higher residual activity can be attributed to arginine8* to glutamine than to the pro1ine"l" to leucine
allele. It is possible that homozygosity for the argininex4to glutamine allele may be found among patients
with MLD with age at onset greater than 25 years, but
in none of the 13 such patients examined by us could
the allele be detected.
On the other hand, the possibility exists that arginines4 to glutamine homozygosity is a pseudodeficiency genotype, that is, does not lead to MLD. IJnfortunately, a screening procedure among healthy
individuals for that genotype is not promising because
its expected frequency is very low, namely (41162 x
1/200)2 = 1.5 x lo-' when the incidence of MLD
reported by Gustavson and Hagberg [17] is used.
Nevertheless, the biochemical and clinical data o n
the four argininea4 to glutamine1MLD compound heterozygotes further substantiate that the distinction between alleles with residual activity and alleles without
function is the clue to the understanding of the phenotypical variation in patients with MLD. It seems reasonable to assume that a similar distinction applies to a
wide variety of enzyme deficiency disorders. A high
degree of phenotypical variation among patients with
identical RIR genotypes, however, has been described
(e.g., [4],and this report), suggesting that nonallelic or
environmental factors have a significant impact on the
pathogenesis of late-onset MLD.
This work was supported by the Deutsche ForschungsRerneinschiltc
and Fonds der Chemischen Industrle. W e thank Drs Schipper (Marburg), Fluharty (Los Angcles), and Bach (Jerusalem) for referring
the patients. Dr Leinekugel (Bonn) determined the ARSA activity
in Y.N.

References
with residual ARSA activity. When the su1fatid.e degradation values are compared (see Table), the two arginine*" to glutamine/proline'26 to leucine compound
heterozygotes are intermediate between p r ~ l i n e * 'to
~
leucine/proline'2" to leucine homozygotes and PDI
MLD compound heterozygotes (i.e.,pseudodekiency).
Moreover, transient expression of the arginine''' to
glutamine allele in BHK cells results in about 9%
(mean) of wild-type ARSA activity (see Fig 3 ) . Thus,
the arginine8' to glutamine transition adds a seconJ
allele to the type R group of MLD alleles.
All 4 individuals carrying the arginineX4to glutamine
allele (compounded with other MLD alleles) suffer
from late-onset MLD. The clinical consequences of homozygosity for that allele, however, remain unknown.
This genotype may also cause late-onset MLD. Because
the values for the sulfatide degradation in the arginine" to glutamineiproline ' X to leucine conipound
heterozygotes were higher than among prolin.e426to

260 Annals of Neurology

Vol 31 No 3

M a x h 1992

1 . Kolodny EH. Metachromatic leukodystrophy a d multiple sul-

fatase deficiency: sulfatide lipidosis. In: Scriver CR, Beaudet AL,
Sly WS, Valle D, eds. Metabolic basis of inherited disease, vol
2. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, l989:l721-175O
2. Conzelmann E, Sandhoff K. Partial cnzvme tlehcien~ies:r e s d u d
activities and the iievelopinent of neurological disorders. Dev
Neurosci 1983/84;6:58-' 1
3. Kappler J, Leinekugel P, Conzelmann E, et al. Genotypephenotype relationship in various degrees of arylsulfatase A deficiency. H u m Genet 1991;86:463-470
4. Poltcn A, Fluharty AL, Fluharty CB, et al. Molecular basis of
different forms of metachromatic leukodystrophy. N Engl J
Mcd 1991 3 2 4 :18-22
5. Bohne W, von Figura K, Gieselmann V. An 11 hp deletion i i l
the arylsulfatase A gene of a patient with late-infantile merachromatic leukodystrophy. H u m Genet 1991;87:155-158
6. Gieselmann V, Fluharry AL, von Figura K. Mutations in the
arylsulfatase A pseudodeficiency allele causing nictachromatic
leukodystrophy. Am J H u m Genet 1991;49:40'-41 3
7 . Hohenschutz C, Eich P, Fried1 W , et al. Pseuclocieficiency o l
arylsulfatase A: a common genetic polymorphism with possible.
disease implications. H u m Genet 1989;82:45-,18
8. Gieselmann V, Polten A, Kreysing J , voii Figur.1 K. Arylsulfa-

vase A pseudodeficiency: loss of a polyadenylation signal and
an N-glycosylation site. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989;86:

94 36-9440
9. Seidel D, Goebel H H , Scholz W. Late-onset metachromatic
leukodystrophy: diagnostic problems elucidated by a case report. J Neurol 1981;226:119-124
10. Schipper HI, Seidel D. Computed tomography in late-onset
metachromatic leukodystrophy. Neuroradiology 1984;26:39-

44
1 1. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, 1989
12. Kreysing J, von Figura K, Gieselmann V. The structure of the
arylsulfatase A gene. Eur J Biochem 1990;191:627-631

13. Stein C, Gieselrnann V, Kreysing J, et al. Cloning and expression of human arylsulfatase A. J Biol Chem 1989;264:12521259
14. Nakayame KL,Eckstein F. Inhibition of restriction endonuclease Nci I cleavage by phosphothioate groups and its application
to oligonucleotide directed mutagenesis. Nucleic Acids Res
1986;14:9679-9698
15. Artelt P, Morel1 C, Ansmeier M, et al. Vectors for efficient
expression in mammalian fibroblasts, myeloid, lymphoid cells
via trdnsfection. Gene 1988;68:213-2 19
16. Peters C, Schmidt B, Rommerskirch W, et al. Phylogenetic conservation of arylsulfarases. J Biol Chem 1990;265:3374-3381
17. Gustavson KH, Hagberg B. The incidence and genetics of MLD
in northern Sweden. Acta Pediatr Scand 197 1;60:585-590

Kappler er al: Late-Onset MLD

261

