CHAPTER 7

Flow Cytometry Crossmatching for
Solid Organ Transplantation
Robert A. Bray
Department of Pathology
Emory University Hospital
Atlanta, Georgia 30322

I. Introduction

11. Applications
111. Materials

IV.
V.
VI.
VII.

VIII.

A. Reagents
B. Miscellaneous Supplies
Cell Preparation and Staining
A. Cell Preparation
B. Staining Procedure
Critical Aspects of the Procedure
Standards
Instruments
Results and Discussion
References

I. Introduction
Independent of the level of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) matching, the
single most important test employed in solid organ allocation is the lymphocyte
crossmatch. This test assesses the level of circulating antibodies in the potential
recipient that are directed against the HLA Class I and/or Class I1 molecules of
the donor. Traditionally, the complement-dependent lymphocytotoxicity (CDC)
crossmatch has been the method employed for assessing circulating alloantibody. However, because of its increased sensitivity, flow cytometry is now
being utilized as an alternative methodology. The flow cytometric crossmatch
(FCXM) uses indirect immunofluorescence to detect human alloantibody that
METHODS IN CELL BIOLOGY, VOL. 41
Copynght 0 1994 by Academic Press. Inc.. All nghts of reproduction in any form reserved

103

104

Robert A. Bray

has bound to target lymphocytes. Although IgG class antibodies appear to be
most associated with early rejection and accelerated graft loss, the detection
of other immunoglobulin isotypes may also be informative. In contrast to the
CDC, the FCXM can easily discriminate between the isotypes and subclasses
of immunoglobulins. Additionally, due to the differential expression and distribution of HLA molecules, it is beneficial to discriminate between T cell and B
cell reactivities. T cells bear predominantly HLA Class I molecules while B
cells express Class I1 molecules and possess a higher density of Class I molecule
expression.
In the FCXM, individual cell populations are discriminated by multicolor
staining using directly conjugated monoclonal antibodies directed against T
cells (CD3) and/or B cells (CD20 or CDI9). Since most newer cytometers have
the capability of simultaneously evaluating three distinct fluorochromes, a threecolor crossmatch can routinely be performed. One fluorescence parameter is
used to assess alloantibody binding via indirect immunofluorescence while the
other two fluorescent parameters are used to delineate desired cell populations
(e.g., identify T cells from B cells). Appropriate postacquisition analyses then
allow for the independent evaluation of the reactivity of a given cell population.
This capability is in direct contrast to the standard CDC crossmatch which
requires the physical separation and purification of a given cell population (e.g.,
T and B lymphocytes) or requires the use of fluorescence microscopy and
selective cell tagging to discriminate between cell populations. Interpretation
of the FCXM is done by directly comparing the fluorescence intensity of the
test cell population (e.g., potential donor cells) treated with the patient’s serum
to the fluorescence intensity of the same cell population treated with a known
negative control serum (i.e., a serum which lacks HLA antibodies). This interpretation is in direct contrast to the subjective visual assessment used in the
CDC technique. Hence, the FCXM is more objective and has the additional
potential to quantitatively assess bound alloantibody.

11. Applications
Currently, the complement-dependent lymphocytotoxicity crossmatch
(CDC) test is the standard methodology employed in a majority of transplant
laboratories. In this test, donor lymphocytes are mixed with serum from potential recipient(s). This primary incubation is followed by the addition of complement, a second incubation period, and the addition of a vital dye to assess cell
death. Significant cell death above background is interpreted as a positive
crossmatch and, in most instances, is a contraindication to transplantation.
Although the CDC assay is the standard method used, numerous adaptations
of the test exist. These variations employ combinations of multiple cell washes,
alterations in the incubation times, the use of anti-human globulin (AHG), and

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

105

reducing agents such as DDT/DTE and/or 2-mercaptoethanol. The ultimate
goals of these variations are to impart increased sensitivity and to discriminate
IgG from IgM antibodies. A negative crossmatch is an indication that the
recipient does not possess antibodies that will result in an immediate or “hyperacute” allograft rejection. Despite its many permutations, pitfalls, and subjective nature, the CDC crossmatch remains a mainstay of transplant laboratories
and has virtually eliminated hyperacute rejection.
Although hyperacute rejections are rare, studies have demonstrated that
some patients with a negative CDC test experienced early graft loss consistent
with humoral rejection. These findings indicated that low levels of alloantibody ,
undetectable by the CDC assay, were present in the recipient at the time of
transplantation. Within the past few years, several reports have shown that
these low levels of alloantibody could be detected by flow cytometry (Garovoy
et al., 1983; Chapman et a / . , 1985; Bray et af., 1989). More importantly, renal
transplant recipients exhibiting a negative CDC assay but a positive FCXM
were more likely to experience early accelerated rejection episodes and graft
loss (Cook et al., 1987; Lazda et al., 1988; Talbot er al., 1989; Mahoney et al.,
1990; Karuppan er al., 1992). The patient groups most likely to experience this
type of rejection were those individuals who were previously alloimmunized
from a rejected transplant, multiple pregnancies, or multiple blood transfusions.
Hence, the use of the FCXM for the semi-quantitative assessment of alloantibody in these potentially high-risk renal and heart patients is quickly replacing
the CDC assay as the standard pretransplant crossmatch.
The FCXM offers additional advantages over the CDC as well. For example,
the FCXM takes less time to perform than the CDC. This is an important
difference since time is a most critical factor when allocating cadaveric organs.
Also, since IgG class antibody is the predominant immunoglobulin responsible
for the observed early graft loss, the FCXM can specifically identify IgG antibodies without the additional manipulations of patient’s serum (e.g., DTT treatment)
needed for the CDC. This factor also can reduce the time involved in resulting
out the crossmatch. Since CDC crossmatches use cell death as the assay end
point, they require that the initial cell viability be at least >85%. Some cell
preparations, such as those derived from cadaveric blood, spleen, or lymph
nodes, may have low initial viability which requires additional manipulations.
Additionally, even though initial viability may be acceptable, due to the fragile
nature of these cell preparations, significant cell death may occur during the
CDC assay making reading and interpretation quite difficult. In contrast, the
FCXM can take advantage of light scatter andlor viability stains to select
the appropriate cell population for analysis. FCXMs have been successfully
performed with cell viabilities 4 0 % . Lastly, since the FCXM directly measures
alloantibody bound to cells, interpretation of the FCXM tends to be more
objective than the CDC. CDC assays rely on visual scoring of stained cells and
the results can be influenced to a significant degree by reader bias.

106

Robert A. Bray

111. Materials
A. Reagents

1. Secondary Antibody
The most critical reagent for the FCXM is the secondary antibody. This
reagent is used to identify the human immunoglobulin that is specifically bound
to the target cell. As such, this reagent should be selected to provide optimum
specificity with minimum background staining. Antibodies can be selected that
are specific for the various isotypes; however, each lot must be verified to
confirm specificity. A preferred secondary antibody would possess the following
properties: (a) well-defined specificity (e.g., Fc specific); (b) a F(ab'), or Fab
fragment to reduce background staining; and (c) no cross-reactivity with mouse
or horse immunoglobulins. Currently, the secondary reagents utilized in our
laboratory are FITC anti-IgG, Fc specific ( Jackson ImmunoResearch, West
Grove, PA; Cat. No. 109-016-098) and anti-IgM, FcsP (Jackson ImmunoResearch, Cat. No. 109-16-043). Most importantly, each lot of secondary antibody
should be titered to determine the optimum working dilution. A sample titration
is shown in Table I. In this titration, the FITC secondary reagent is titered
from 1 :4 through 1 :20. Dilutions of the FITC reagent are tested against a
lymphocyte cell population that has been preincubated with various dilutions
of a known positive control serum. From the resulting chessboard titration one
can identify the appropriate dilution of the secondary reagent. In this example,
it appears that FITC dilutions of between 1 : 8 and 1 : 10 would be appropriate
(shaded area). The actual working dilution for this lot was 1 :8. Although higher
channel displacements are seen with lower (more concentrated) dilutions of
the secondary reagent, higher channel displacements are observed at greater
dilutions of the pooled positive serum (PPS) when higher dilutions of the
FITC are employed. Primarily, this is a result of reducing the background
noise as can be observed in the top line of the table which lists the actual
median channel value for each dilution of the secondary reagent tested with
normal human serum (NHS). After determining the appropriate working dilution
of the reagent, testing against mouse and horse immunoglobulins may be performed.

2. Monoclonal Antibodies
Depending upon the cell population to be evaluated, any number of monoclonal antibodies that react with the desired cluster antigen are acceptable.
However, for most solid organ-related crossmatches, CD3, for identifying T
cells, and CD19 or CD20, for identifying B cells, are the principal choices.
Antibodies such as CD4 or CD8 should be avoided since these molecules may
associate with HLA molecules on the cell surface and one runs the risk of
stearic hinderance in antibody binding. The choice of fluorochrome for the

107

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

Table I
Example of an IgG Titration
IgG dilutions’

Sera“
~

NHS
PPS
1: 5
1 : 10
1 :20
1 :40
I :80

-

1:4

1.6

1:8

1:lO

1:20

247‘

241

186

175

150

283d
152
113
80
80

273
155
108
87
78

260
188
147

251

175
140
105
90
48

~~

~~

190

133

Note. The highlighted box indicates the region
where dilutions in the FITC and PPS were informative for determining the appropriate dilution of the
FITC reagent. The actual working dilution for this
lot of FITC was 1 :8.
NHS, normal human serum control; PPS,
pooled positive serum control.
* FITC-conjugated. anti-human IgG, Fc specific
(Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA). Reagent was reconstituted from lyophilized form with
distilled water and dilutions were made with “wash
buffer”.
Values in this line are the actual median channel values for the IgG reagent when incubated with
NHS.
Values in this section are channel displacements, calculated by subtracting the actual median
channel value of the PPS dilution from the median
channel value of the NHS for the given dilution of
IgG.

secondary antibody will determine the fluorochromes for the monoclonal antibodies. At present, most laboratories utilize a fluorescein-conjugated secondary
antibody thus relegating phycoerythrin or other longer wavelength emitters
such as PerCP for identifying cell populations.

3. Control Sera
The FCXM requires both a positive and a negative control serum. The positive
control serum usually consists of pooled sera from patients with very high
levels of anti-HLA antibodies. The PPS should be diluted such that a reasonable
shift in fluorescence is seen. Using PPS undiluted will produce very strong
positive results; however, most actual crossmatches do not exhibit strong reactions. Hence, using a positive control serum that exhibits a moderate positive

108

Robert A. Bray

reaction can help in assessing the performance of the test. For example, if the
laboratory’s positive control regularly exhibits a shift in fluorescence of 100
channels over the negative control serum, then a test sample where the positive
control only exhibits a 40- or 50-channel shift may be an indication of an invalid
test.
The negative control serum is, by far, the most important control element
in the FCXM. This reagent can be either a pooled or a single-donor serum.
However, this serum must be tested thoroughly with several (>10) normal cell
donors to ensure that the reagent has no reactivity with human lymphocytes.
This exercise will not only ensure that the negative control serum is appropriate
but will also provide the information needed for proper interpretation of the
FCXM.

4. Wash Buffer
The standard wash buffer used throughout the crossmatch consists of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS)
and 0.1% sodium azide (NaN,). Wash buffer should be stored at 4°C and
appropriate precautions should be taken for disposal of NaN, containing
solutions.

5. Paraformaldehyde
A standard 2% paraformaldehyde solution in PBS (final pH 7.2 k 0.2) is used
as the final fixative. Paraformaldehyde should be prepared in a fume hood with
proper ventilation. Paraformaldehyde solution should be stored at 4°C and
protected from exposure to light. Shelf life is approximately 2 weeks.
B. Miscellaneous Supplies

The following is a list (by no means inclusive) of additional supplies that will
be needed to perform the FCXM.
Eppendorf pipettor (or similar pipetting device) capable of delivering volumes from 10 to 100 pl.
Small volume test tubes. Our laboratory utilizes plastic and glass, 6 x 50mm tubes for the FCXM (glass, Baxter Scientific Products, Stone Mountain,
GA., product T12901-1; polypropylene, Evergreen Scientific, Los Angeles,
CA., product 2142301-030). These types of tubes hold a total volume of 450 pl
and permit the use of small numbers of cells while minimizing cell loss.
Table top centrifuge.
Airfuge (Beckman Instruments, Inc.).
Vacuum aspiration system.

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

109

IV. Cell Preparation and Staining
A. Cell Preparation

Several cell types can be used in the FCXM. Essentially, any single-cell
suspension can serve as a target cell in the FCXM. However, the most common
sources of targets are mononuclear cells derived from peripheral blood, lymph
nodes, or spleen. Detailed procedures for preparing cell populations can be
found in a number of other references (Zachari and Teresi, 1990).
Once an adequate cell preparation is obtained, only small numbers of cells
are needed for the crossmatch. The cells should be resuspended in the “wash
buffer” and held at 4°C until ready to stain. The actual cell concentration of
the preparation is not critical; however, the actual number of cells used per
tube is extremely critical. In general, the cell number need not exceed 2.5 x lo5
cells per tube. By far the most important variable is the ratio of cells to volume
of serum used in the FCXM. By utilizing the small-volume test tubes, cell
numbers as low as 105/tube can be easily used. Since patient serum is usually
limiting, volumes between 20 and 50 pl/tube are recommended. Increasing the
volume of patient serum used per tube or decreasing the number of cells per
tube will increase the sensitivity of the FCXM. Conversely, using less serum or,
more importantly, increasing the number of cells used per test can significantly
decrease the sensitivity. Hence, it is important that the laboratory establish its
staining protocol and insist that accuracy and consistency of cell concentrations
and serum volumes used be strictly adhered to.
B. Staining Procedure
(See Fig. I for procedure flow chart and Table 11 for tube layout.)
1. Place appropriate quantity of cells in 6 x 50-mm tubes (or other small
volume tube) and centrifuge to pellet (700g for 5 min).
2. Aspirate supernatant, being cautious not to aspirate the cell pellet.
3. Add the appropriate patient or control serum (25-50 ~ lto)the corresponding labeled tubes (see Table 11). Vortex to ensure proper mixing of serum
and cells.
4. Incubate for 30 min at 4°C.
5. Wash cells with 400 pl of COLD wash buffer. (Note: add 200 pl, vortex,
and then add the additional 200 pl.) Centrifuge at 7008 for 5 min.
6. Aspirate the supernatant and repeat step 5 .
NOTE: BE CAREFUL WHEN ASPIRATING SAMPLES TO PREVENT CROSSCONTAMINATION.

7. Following the second wash step and aspiration, add 20 pl of pretitered
secondary antibody and the appropriate quantity of directly conjugated
CD3, CD20, or other commercial monoclonal antibody directly to the
dry cell pellet.

110

Robert A. Bray
Cells

/serum
Incubate
4Oor 25OC, 30 min

1

Wash 3X

4

Add Anti-lgG FITC
and CD3 PerCP & CD2O PE
Incubate 20 mln at Room Temp

1

Wash 2-3X

1

Fix in 1% Paraformaldehyde

Analyze on Flow Cytometer

Fig. 1 Flow chart illustrating a three-color flow cytometric crossmatch.

Table I1
Suggested Setup for Performing Three-Color Flow
Cytometric Crossmatch
Tube no.
1

2
3
4
5-n

Primary antibody/serum

Secondary antibody(s)

NHS or autologous'

FITC a-IgG
CD3 PerCP and CD20 PEh
Pooled positive serum
FITC a-IgG
CD3 PerCP and CD20 PE
Patient sample 1
FITC a-IgG
CD3 PerCP and CD20 PE
Patient sample 2
FITC a-IgG
CD3 PerCP and CD20 PE
Repeat setup as in tubes 3 or 4 for each additional serum

NHS, normal human serum; autologous, patient's own serum
may be used to identify self-reactive antibodies.
For performing a two-color crossmatch, individual tubes must
be set up for CD3 and CD20. In this instance, phycoerythrin would
be the conjugate for both CD3 and CD20. In addition, the total
volume of each serum used and number of cells required will have
to be doubled.

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

111

NOTE: USE THE MANUFACTURER’S RECOMMENDED CONCENTRATION FOR ALL
MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES UNLESS OTHERWISE TESTED.

8. Incubate antibodies for 20 min at 4°C and protect from light.
9. Following incubation, wash cells twice with 400-pl volumes of COLD
wash buffer. Follow wash procedure as indicated in steps 5 and 6.
10. After final wash and aspiration, resuspend cells in 100 pl of COLD wash
buffer.
11. While vortexing, add 100 pI of COLD 2% paraformaldehyde solution to
each tube. Fixed cells can be held at 4°C in the dark, for up to 7 days.

V. Critical Aspects of the Procedure
Although the FCXM is a relatively straightforward technique, there are several critical aspects that can significantly effect the results and performance.
The first and most critical aspect of the crossmatch is that a multicolor method
be used. Figure 2 clearly demonstrates the drawbacks of evaluating an ungated
FCXM. The presence of natural killer (NK) cells in peripheral blood contribute
to a high background fluorescence. NK cells bear the CD16 molecule which is
the Fc receptor for IgG. Unfortunately, no secondary anti-IgG reagent can
discriminate specifically bound IgG from cytophilic IgG. As illustrated in Fig.
2, cytophilic IgG bound to NK cells can generate a significant signal. Hence,
the need for a multicolor technique to identify only the cell populations of
interest. Additionally, and depending upon the cell preparation, other cell populations can contaminate the lymphocyte gate.
A second important aspect of the FCXM is the ratio of serum volume to
number of cells. The lymphocytes are, in fact, small antigen bearing particles
that are used to assess the levels of alloantibody. The ability to detect alloantibody in a patient’s serum sample is dependent upon the level of antibody and
the number of cells tested. Thus, it would seem prudent to use as much serum
as possible with as few cells as possible to obtain maximum sensitivity. This,
however, is not feasible and most laboratories use between 20 and 100 p1 of
serum and 0.25 to 1 x lo6 cells per tube. The important point here is that
fluctuations in the serum-cell ratio can significantly alter the crossmatch results
essentially producing false-negative results if too many cells are used. (Fig. 3).
For flow cytometric crossmatching, no more than 0.5 x lo6 are needed per
tube. Utilizing the small 6 x 50 polypropylene tubes, as few as lo5 cells can
be easily stained with only minimal cell loss. Thus, one cannot overemphasize
the importance of strict adherence to the laboratory’s established procedure
specifying the numbers of cells and volume of serum used.
A third critical aspect relates to the number of wash steps that are used
following the primary incubation. Within a patient’s serum, only a small portion
of the total immunoglobulin will constitute the anti-HLA antibody. This is true

112

Robert A. Bray

104

- 100

V3:TITEROOl

6

0
100
101
102
103
FWFluorescence 2

104

50 i

n
-

100

20 1

100

10'
102
103
V3:TITEROO1/FLl/FIuorescence 1

104

C

10'
10'
103
V3:TITEROOl /FL1/Fluorescence 1

104

D

10'
102
103
V3:TITEROOl /FLl /Fluorescence 1

104

Fig. 2 Cytophilic immunoglobulin binding to N K cells. Peripheral blood lymphcytes were preincubated with normal
human serum that was devoid of HLA antibodies. Cells were subsequently stained with FITC anti-human IgG.
phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated CD20 and PerCP CD3. (A) Dual-parameter dot plot of PE CD20 (x-axis; R2) versus
PerCP CD3 (y-axis; R1). (B) FITC anti-immunoglobulin staining pattern of the total mononuclear cell population
(ungated). (C and D) FITC antiimmunoglobulin staining of selected T cells (R1)and B cells (R2), respectively.

113

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

2oo
150

loo
50

I

I
I

172

i

0
0

-ff 1:4 Dil

* 1:8 Dil -+ 1:16 D i l

I

1

I

I

I

20

40

60

80

100

~~

.J

120

Microliters of Serum
Fig. 3 Effects of alterations in serum : cell ratio on the sensitivity of the FCXM. Three dilutions
of a known positive control serium were tested against a fixed number of cells ( 5 x 10S/tube).
Each dilution of serum was then evaluated by increasing the volume added per tube while holding
the cell number constant. Thus, each line represents an experiment wherein four individual tubes
were incubated with increasing volumes of the indicated serum dilution. As the results show, as
one increases the volume of serum (antibody), there is a corresponding increase in the channel
displacement. MDCF indicates channel displacement as calculated from the median channel fluorescence value ofeach tube. The numbers listed are the actual channel displacement values. Results
reported are for CD3-gated T lymphocytes.

even in patients with high-titer anti-HLA antibodies. Thus, it is important to
use a sufficient wash protocol following the primary incubation in order to
ensure that residual immunoglobulin is removed prior to the addition of the
secondary antibody. Insufficient washes may result in a false-negative FCXM.
A fourth critical aspect of the procedure deals with the nature of the secondary
antibody used. Since the goal of the FCXM is the detection of specifically
bound antibody of a defined subclass, it is important to use a secondary antibody
with a very narrow specificity. For example, a conjugated anti-human IgG that
is Fc specific and preabsorbed against mouse and horse serum proteins is
desirable for the antibody. Additionally, if the immunoglobulin is an F(ab’), or
Fab fragment, nonspecific background staining can be reduced. If the secondary
antibody is a mouse monoclonal, then demonstrating lack of cross-reactivity
with horse immunoglobulins would be important. These cross-reactivities are
notable since the directly conjugated monoclonal antibodies are of mouse origin
and cross-reactivity with these immunoglobulins will render the crossmatch
uninterpretable. Additionally, many HLA laboratories are now engaging in
post-transplant monitoring in an attempt to quantify anti-donor antibodies. In

114

Robert A. Bray

many instances these patients are receiving some form of anti-rejection therapy
which may include OKT3 (mouse) or ALG (anti-lymphocyte globulin; horse).
In these instances, cytotoxicity assays are of no value since both OKT3 and
ALG are lymphocytotoxic in the CDC assay. However, if one has chosen
the secondary antibody appropriately, screening for the presence of anti-HLA
antibodies can easily be performed on these individuals. Again, cross-reactivity
with mouse or horse immunoglobulins would render the FCXM uninterpretable.
A final critical aspect of this procedure deals with the preparation of patient
and control sera. In our laboratory we have found it most useful to airfuge
(100,000g for 15 min) all sera prior to testing. Most of the sera used in crossmatching have undergone at least one freeze-thaw cycle. Ultracentrifugation
helps remove immunoglobulin aggregates that may produce nonspecific background staining, particularly on B cells. This background is most likely a result
of immune aggregates binding to Fc receptors (e.g., CD32).

VI. Standards
Unfortunately, there are no commercial standards available for the flow
cytometric crossmatch. Hence, each laboratory must establish its own set of
controls and standards. By far the most important control/standard is the normal
human serum that is used as the negative control. For the FCXM either pooled
male serum or single-donor, preferably male, serum is recommended. Serum
from females may be used provided the individual has not been pregnant. During
pregnancy, the female is exposed to paternal HLA antigens and has the potential
to produce anti-HLA antibodies. Although the frequency of this sensitization
is only about 1/20, care must be taken to ensure that the chosen normal human
serum does not contain anti-HLA antibodies. Screening of a potential negative
control serum should be accomplished by performing a FCXM using cells from
a panel ( N 2 10) of individuals whose HLA types are known and which cover
the majority of the HLA specificities. This testing should be done on the same
day. A record of the actual median channel value for each individual’s T cell
and B cell populations should be made without changing any machine settings.
Calculate the average channel value and the standard deviation for both T and
B cell populations. Using a two standard deviation (2 SD) cutoff, one can then
define a channel value which can be used as a discriminator for positivity. That
is, within a certain degree of statistical confidence, a channel displacement in
a patient’s sample that is greater than the 2 SD cut point may be interpreted
as positive. This, however, is not absolute and should be determined by each
laboratory and reconfirmed with each now lot of normal human serum.
As an alternative to median channel values, one can also utilize a semiquantitative method for determining relative immunofluorescence. This involves the use of fluorescent microbeads that have a defined number of fluorochrome molecules attached (Schwartz and Fernandez-Repollet, 1993). By

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

115

running a mixture containing beads, each with a different level of fluorescence, one can perform a relative calibration of the flow cytometer. Subsequent
channel values can be converted to the number of molecules of equivalent
soluble fluorochrome (MESFs). Results are then reported in MESF units and
the determination of a positive result is made by indicating a minimum MESF
value above which a crossmatch is considered positive.
In contrast to the negative control serum, the positive control standard is
simpler to obtain. One possible approach for obtaining a good positive control
is to pool sera from patients that have high levels of cytotoxic anti-HLA antibodies. Such a pool can then be diluted several fold and used as the positive control
for the FCXM. In determining an appropriate working dilution, it is beneficial
to utilize this control at a dilution which yields a reasonable shift in fluorescence
but not necessarily a maximum shift (saturating). It is important to remember
that the FCXM should be optimized for the detection of low levels of circulating
alloantibody. Thus, using a positive control that produces a 1000-channel displacement, when the 2 SD cutoff for determining a positive result is 40 channels,
does not add any useful information to the assay. Significant errors could be
made that would not necessarily result in a significant alteration in the channel
displacement of the positive control. Additionally, using such a strong positive
control increases the possibility that a minute amount of carryover contamination may produce a false-positive result.
Therefore, an appropriate working dilution of the positive control would be
more sensitive to deviations in the system and less likely to contribute to
a false-positive result. Diluting the positive control to yield a reproducible
displacement of between 100 and 200 channels (i.e., well below the level of
saturation) can be helpful in detecting errors in the numbers of cells added
(Fig. 4). For example, in an actual crossmatch if the positive control serum
only demonstrated a displacement of 50 channels, the crossmatch may be judged
as uninterpretable or may require repeating.
Lastly, accreditation for flow cytometry crossmatching is available through
the American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics (ASHI).
ASHI has published standards for the performance of flow cytometric crossmatching for transplantation. These standards are available from the ASHI
office in Lenexa, Kansas, and a copy may be obtained by calling (913) 541-0009.

VII. Instruments
At present, all manufacturers’ instruments are suitable for performing the
FCXM. The only restriction might be that some of the older instruments may
not be fitted with a third photomultiplier tube for evaluating the long wavelength
emitting fluorochromes and thus may be unable to perform a three-color crossmatch. In this instance, performing two separate dual-color crossmatches (e.g.,
CD3 and CD20) would be appropriate and would yield the same information

3 16

Robert A. Bray

0

200

400

600

800

1000

0

200
400
600
800
3:TITEROOWFLl/Fluorescence 1

1000

0

200
400
600
800
3:TITER002/FL1/Fluorescence 1

3:TITEROOl /FL1/Fluorescence 1

0

200

400

600

800

3:TITER003/FLl/Fluorescence 1

1000

1000

Fig. 4 Channel displacements observed by titration of a positive crossmatch serum. (A) Negative
control, normal human serum (NHS). (B, C, D) Positive serum titration demonstrating a channel
displacements (CD) of 40, 160, and 337 channels, respectively. Histogram C represents a recommended dilution for the positive control. (FACScan cytometer; 4-decade log scale: 1024-channel
resolution; LYSYS I1 analysis.)

although the requirement for total numbers of cells and volume of serum would
be doubled. Nonetheless, virtually all manufactures’ instruments and their associated software are capable of producing acceptable and reproducible FCXM
results. By far the greatest variable is the setup of the crossmatch.

VIII. Results and Discussion
Analysis of the FCXM is also quite straightforward. During data acquisition,
samples may be collected either ungated or with gates set around the cell
population of interest (e.g., monocytes or lymphocytes). The majority of
FCXMs will benefit from acquiring lymphocyte-gated data. Postacquisition
analysis is then performed by gating on a selected cell population based
on fluorescence and then displaying the fluorescence histogram of the antiimmunoglobulin reagent. For example, in a standard three-color crossmatch,
FITC is used as the conjugate for the anti-IgG reagent in conjunction with
phycoerythrin-conjugated CD20 and PerCP-conjugated CD3. Following acquisi-

117

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

tion of lymphocyte-gated data, individual regions are set around CD3- and
CD20-positive cells. This is performed by displaying a dot (or contour) plot of
CD3 vs CD20 (Fig. 5). Subsequently, analysis of the FITC staining can be
made by displaying a single-parameter histogram from the CD3 region (Region
1, Fig. 5 ) and/or from the CD20 region (Region 2, Fig. 5 ) . This display format
is employed for each tube of the FCXM. Following completion, the median
channel value for each cell population is recorded. Median channel provides
the best assessment of the distribution of the total population of cells. If a
particular instrument cannot generate a medium channel value, then placing
analysis cursors tightly around the peak distribution will produce a mean channel
value that will approximate the median. Since HLA molecules are equally
distributed on the appropriate cell populations, if an HLA antibody is present,
all cells should be displaced on the histogram. A displacement in 10% of the

IB
1000

2:TITEROOl

1

Boo]

..

Tcells

600
400

200
2:TITEROOl/FL1/Fluorescence 1
0. .
0

200

400

600

800 1000 2 0 1

n

0

c

200

400

600

800

1000

2:TITEROOi /FL1/Fluorescence 1

Fig. 5 Three-color flow cytometric crossmatch. (A) Dot plot displaying CD20 PE staining of B cells (x-axis) versus
CD3 PerCP staining of T cells (y-axis). (B) Single-parameter histogram of T cells (RI). NHS, staining fluorescence
with the normal human serum control; PPS, staining fluorescence observed with a positive serum sample. CD. channel
displacement, is the distance between the median channel values of the two peaks (line). (C) Single-parameter histogram
of B cells (R2). (FACScan cytometer; 4-decade log scale; 1024-channel resolution: LYSIS 11 analysis.)

118

Robert A. Bray

total cells, for example, would not be consistent with an HLA antibody and
hence would not be considered significant. The actual calculation of results is
performed by subtracting the median channel value of the negative control
serum from the value of the positive control and all the evaluated patient’s
serum samples. This difference in channel displacement (CD) is used as the
criteria for determining whether a crossmatch is positive. As detailed above,
the laboratory must establish its own cutoff for determining how great a channel
displacement is considered a positive result.
While technically simple to evaluate, the actual clinical interpretation of the
FCXM is quite a bit more complex. A complete discussion of the clinical
implications of a positive flow crossmatch is beyond the scope of this chapter
and the reader is referred to the literature for more information (Cook et al.,
1987; Lazda et al., 1988; Talbot et al., 1989, 1992; Mahoney et al., 1990;
Karuppan et al., 1992;Bray, 1993;Ogura, 1993).However, the clinical history of
each patient needs to be taken into consideration when the FCXM is interpreted.
More importantly, since there are no methods for confirming that the detected
antibody is directed against a Class I and/or a Class I1 HLA antigen, knowledge
of the patient’s clinical history is most important. Thus, a positive FCXM will
not always constitute a contraindication to transplantation.
Lastly, the utility of this method is not limited to the final crossmatch prior to
transplantation. Several laboratories have begun to use this method to routinely
screen serum from patients on transplant waiting lists. As part of the laboratory’s
ongoing monitoring of patients awaiting organ transplantation, periodic reevaluation of a patient’s level of alloantibody is performed. A PRA (panel reactive
antibody) value is obtained by screening patients against a panel of cells whose
HLA type is known. From such a panel, the laboratory not only can assess
the quantity of alloantibody (i.e., how many of the panel cells are reactive with
the serum), but also may be able to identify the actual specificity (i.e., determine
which HLA antigen the antibody is directed against). Our laboratory and others
have reported significant levels of anti-HLA antibody in patients whose cytotoxic PRA was 0% (i.e., no reactivity with panel donors in the standard CDC
assay) (Shroyer et al., 1991; Bray, 1993). Obviously, if antibodies can be detected and a specificity identified prior to crossmatching, a significant amount
of time and resources may saved by initially selecting individuals who show
no evidence of anti-HLA antibodies that are directed against the HLA antigens
of the organ donor. Thus, performing flow cytometric PRAs of selected patients
can aid in the proper allocation of donor organs which, in turn, saves time and
resources and helps increase the chances for long-term graft survival.
References
Bray, R. A. (1993). Ann. N . Y . Acad. Sci. 677, 138-151.
Bray, R. A., Lebeck, L. L., and Gebel, H. M. (1989). Transplantation 48, 834-840.
Chapman, J. R., Deierhoi, M. H., Carter, N. P., Ting, A., and Morris, P. J. (1985). Transplant.
Proc. 17, 2480-2482.

7. Flow Cytometry Crossmatching

119

Cook, D. J., Terasaki, P. I., Iwaki, Y., Terashita. G. Y.. and Lau, M. (1987). Clin. Transplant.
1, 253.
Garovoy, M. R., Rheinschrnilt, M. A., Bigos, M., Perkins. H., Colombe, B . , Feduska, N.. and
Salvatierra, 0. (1983). Transplant. Proc. 15, 1939-1942.
Karuppan, S. S., Lindholm, A., and Moiler, E. (1992). Transplantation 53(3), 666-673.
Lazd,a, V. A., Pollak, R., Mozes, M. F., and Jonasson, 0. (1988). Transplantation 45, 562.
Mahoney, R. J., Ault, K. A., Given, S. R., Adams, R. J., Breggia, A. C., Paris, P. A,, Palomaki.
G. E., Hitchcox, S. A., White, B. W., Hirnrnelfarb, J., and Leeber, D. A. (1990). Transplantation
49(3), 527-535.
Ogura, K., Terasaki, P. I., Johnson, C., Mendez, R., Rosenthal, J. T., Ettenger, R.. Martin,
D. C., Dainko, E., Cohen, L., Mackett, T., Berne, T., Barba, L., and Lieberman (1993).
Transplantation 56, 294-298.
Schwartz, A., and Fernandez-Repollet, E. (1993). Ann. N . Y . A c a d . Sci. 677, 28-39.
Shroyer, T. W., Diethelm, A. G., Burgarny, M. A., Harvey, L. R., Hudson, S. L., and Barger.
B. (1991). Hum. Immunol. 32, Suppl. I , 100.
Talbot, D., Givan, A. L., Shenton, B . K., Stratton, A., Proud, G., and Taylor, R. M. (1989).
Transplantation 47(3), 552-555.
Talbot, D., Cavanaugh, G., Coates, E., Givan, A. L., Shenton, B. K., Lennard, T. W., Proud,
G., and Taylor, R. M. (1992). Transplantation 53(4), 925-928.
Zachari, A., and Teresi, G . , eds. (1990). “ASH1 Laboratory Manual,” 2nd ed. American Society
for Histocompatibility, Kansas City.

