0022-5347/78/1194-04 76

Vol. 119, April
Printed in U.SA.

THE JouRNAL oF UROLOGY

Copyright © 1978 by The Williams & Wilkins Co.

USE OF THE OMENTAL PEDICLE GRAFT IN EXENTERATIVE
SURGERY
HARPER D. PEARSE*
From the Department o{Urology, University o{Oregon Health Sciences Center, Portland, Oregon

ABSTRACT

The pedicled omentum can be used effectively to cover the ureterointestinal anastomosis and to
fill the irradiated, denuded pelvis after a radical cancer operation.
The use of the pedicled omentum in a reconstructive operation on the urinary tract has been described by Kiricuta and
Goldstein, 1 and popularized by Turner-Warwick. 2• 3 Its primary use to support the ureterointestinal anastomosis and to
fill the irradiated, denuded and empty pelvis after a radical
cancer operation is described.
The principles of omental mobilization are well outlined by
Turner-Warwick and include 1) use of absorbable suture
material and individual vessel ligation (this may not be
necessary on the gastric side but is indicated on the pedicle

omental pedicle in a retroperitoneal position, 5) adequate
abdominal exposure and 6) anticipation that the procedure
may be used. 2
Part A of the figure shows an omental pedicle graft based
on the right gastroepiploic artery. The colon is then mobilized
and retracted medially. The omentum covers and supports the
ureteroileal anastomosis (part B of figure). The right colon is
returned to its normal position. The omentum is now in a
retroperitoneal position and the dependent portian is allowed
to fill the pelvis (parte of figure).

A

{
f

(

)

(

\

\

\

(

A, omental pedicle graft based on right gastroepiploic artery. B, right colon is mobilized and retracte<l medially. Omenturn covers and
supports ureteral ileal anastomosis. C, right colon is returned to normal position. Omenturn is now in retroperitoneal position and
dependent portion is allowed to fill empty pelvis.

where it may contact urine), 2) separation of the omentum
from the transverse mesocolon in the avascular plane, 3)
basing the graft on the gastroepiploic arch leaving a vascularized, viable pedicle (the natural pattem of omental vascularization favors a pedicle based on the right gastroepiploic artery
although a left based pedicle can be used), 4) placing the
Accepted for publication June 3, 1977.
Read at annual meeting ofWestern Section, American Urological
Association. San Francisco, California, March 13-17, 1977.
* Requests for reprints: Department of Urology, University of
Oregon Health Sciences Center, Portland, Oregon 97201.

Advantages of the omental pedÍcle graft in pelvic exenterative procedures include 1) support of ureterointestinal anastomoses, 2) occlusion ofpreviously irradiated pelvic dead space
with viable tissue, 3) assist resolution of local pelvic infection,
4) enhanced absorption of blood and urine in dead space, 5)
may make re-exploration of ureterointestinal anastomoses
easier, 6) prevention of pelvic adhesions and 7) when healing
is complete, the omentum regains its pliability and mobility.
The disadvantage of adding 45 minutes or an hour to an
already lengthy operative procedure must be weighed against
its possible advantages.

This mater~@vas rnpcied
at the N LM a nd may b,e

USE OF OMENTAL PEDICLE GRAFT IN EXENTERATIVE SURGERY

We recommend the use ofthe pedicled omentum in carefully
selected cases of exenterative surgery as a planned part of the
procedure.
REFERENCES

l. Kiricuta, I. and Goldstein, A. M. B.: The repair of extensive

vesicovaginal fistulas with pedicled omentum: a review of 27

cases. J. Uro!., 108: 724, 1972.
2. Turner-Warwick, R. T., Wynne, E. J. C. and Handley-Ashken,
M.: The use of the omental pedicle graft in repair and
reconstruction of the urinary tract. Brit. J. Surg., 54: 849,
1967.
3. Turner-Warwick, R. T.: The use ofpedicle grafts in the repair of
urinary tract fistulae. Brit. J. Uro!., 44: 644, 1972.

This material was co,pciad
:::;it·t·hJC NI

477

:llnr! m:ll'<I'

he

