Cell, Vol. 67, 437-447, October18, 1991,Copyright© 1991 by Cell Press

Germline Mutations in the Wilms'
Tumor Suppressor Gene Are Associated with Abnormal
Urogenital Development in Denys-Drash Syndrome
Jerry Pelletier, 1,= Wendy Bruening, 1
Clifford E. Kashtan, 3 S. Michael Mauer, 3
J. Carlos Manivel, 4 Jane E. Striegel, 5
Donald C. Houghton, e Claudine Junien, 7
Ren6e Habib, 8 Laurie Fouser, 9 Richard N. Fine, 1°
Bernard L. Silverman," Daniel A. Haber, ~,~=
and David Housman 1
1Center for Cancer Research
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
2McGill Cancer Center
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec
Canada H3G 1Y6
3Department of Pediatric Nephrology
4Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
University of Minnesota Medical School
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
SDepartment of Pediatrics
6Department of Pathology
Oregon Health Sciences University
Portland, Oregon 97201
71NSERM U73
Gdn~tique et Pathologie Foetale
8U.192, H6pital Necker--Enfants Malades
Paris, France
9Department of Pediatrics
University of Washington School of Medicine
Seattle, Washington 98195
1°Department of Pediatrics
State University of New York at Stony Brook
Stony Brook, New York 11794
11Division of Pediatric Endocrinology
Children's Memorial Hospital
Chicago, Illinois 60614
12Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center
Harvard Medical School
Boston, Massachusetts 02114

Summary
Denys-Drash syndrome is a rare human condition in
which severe urogenital aberrations result in renal failure, pseudohermaphroditism, and Wilms' tumor (nephroblastoma). To investigate its possible role, we have
analyzed the coding exons of the Wilms' tumor suppressor gene (WT1) for germline mutations. In ten independent cases of Denys-Drash syndrome, point
mutations in the zinc finger domains of one WT1 gene
copy were found. Nine of these mutations are found
within exon 9 (zinc finger III); the remaining mutation
is in exon 8 (zinc finger II). These mutations directly
affect DNA sequence recognition. In two families analyzed, the mutations were shown to arise de novo.
Wilms' tumors from three individuals and one juvenile
granulosa cell tumor demonstrate reduction to homo-

zygosity for the mutated WT1 allele. Our results provide evidence of a direct role for WT1 in Denys-Drash
syndrome and thus urogenital system development.
Introduction

Wilms' tumor (WT) is an embryonal malignancy of the kidney arising from the metanephric blastema, affecting approximately 1 in 10,000 children (Young and Miller, 1975;
Matsunaga, 1981). A tumor suppressor gene for this disease, WT1 from chromosome 11p13, has recently been
isolated (Call et al., 1990; Gessler et al., 1990). All or part
of WT1 is homozygously deleted in a small but highly informative set of sporadic Wilms' tumors (Lewis et al., 1988;
Gessler et al., 1990; Ton et al., 1991; Davis et al., 1991;
Royer-Pokora et al., 1991). Several sporadic and hereditary WTs have been described in which WT1 is specifically
altered, providing molecular evidence for the involvement
of this gene in Wilms' tumor etiology (Haber et al., 1990;
Huff et al., 1991; Pelletier et al., 1991a). The WT1 gene
contains ten coding exons that produce four distinct WT1
mRNAs, reflecting the presence or absence of two alternatively spliced exons (Haber et al., 1990, 1991). The predicted WT1 polypeptides show several features characteristic of transcription factors (i.e., nuclear localization, four
contiguous Cys2-His2zinc finger domains, and an amino
terminus rich in proline and glutamine residues) (Call et
al., 1990; Gessler et al., 1990; Pelletier et al., 1991c). The
zinc finger domains of the WT1 polypeptides and a class
of early growth response mammalian polypeptides (the
EGR and Krox family), activated during GOto G1 transition
in culture cells, show considerable homology to each other
(Call et al., 1990; Gessler et al., 1990) and recognize similar binding sites (Rauscher et al., 1990). The EGR and
Krox gene products are thought to be important nuclear
intermediates in signal transduction.
WT1 expression during nephrogenesis in the kidneys is
limited to the condensed mesenchyme, renal vesicle, and
glomerular epithelial cell and therefore is likely to play
a specific role in glomerular development during kidney
organogenesis (Pritchard-Jones et al., 1990). The following recent results have also implicated WT1 in development of the genital system. First,.the incidence rates of
hypospadias (ventrally placed external penile urinary orifice) and cryptorchidism (undescended testis) among patients with bilateral Wilms' tumor is at least 10-fold higher
than in the generalpopulation (Bond, 1975; Breslow and
Beckwith, 1982). Second, an association between urogenital system anomalies with early onset WTs and intralobar
nephroblastomatosis has been suggested based on statistical data (Breslow et al., 1988; Beckwith et al., 1989).
Third, high levels of WT1 mRNA expression are observed
in the developing gonads early in fetal development
(Pritchard-Jones et al., 1990; Pelletier et al., 1991c). In the
mature gonads, WT1 expression is restricted to the Sertoli
cells of the testis and granulosa and epithelial cells of the
ovaries (Pelletier et al., 1991c). Fourth, molecular analysis

Cell
438

of the WT1 gene in two children with Wilms' tumor and
genital system malformations (hypospadias and undescended testis) has revealed small hemizygous intragenic
deletions within WT1 in both individuals (Pelletier et al.,
1991a). Both deletions disrupt the WT1 reading frame.
These results imply a central role for the WT1 gene product
in genital system development.
A genetic predisposition to WT is observed in two disease syndromes with similar genital system malformations. In the WAGR syndrome, there is an association of
Wilms' tumor (W) with congenital aniridia (A) (absence or
malformation of the iris), genitourinary malformations (G),
and mental retardation (R) (Miller et al., 1964). This syndrome is correlated with constitutional deletions within
chromosome 11 band p13 (Riccardi et al., 1978). This constellation of anomalies, which show variable expressivity
and incomplete penetrance, define a cluster of genes
within 1lp13 important in the development of the iris, kidney, urogenital tract, and brain. As described above, recent results suggest that the genital system anomalies
associated with WAGR syndrome are a phenotype resulting from a null mutation in one WTI allele. Denys et al.
(1967) and Drash et al. (1971) have described an association of Wilms' tumor with male pseudohermaphroditism
and progressive renal failure. This is a rare Wilms' tumorassociated syndrome, with only about 60 cases reported
in the literature over the last 20 years (for a review, see
Pelletier et al., 1991b). The nephropathy associated with
this syndrome generally occurs very early (before the age
of 2 years) and in conjunction with WT or genital abnormalities or both (Habib et al., 1985). It is characterized by a
specific glomerular lesion--shrunken glomerular tufts with
accumulation of matrix material in the mesangium, surrounded by hypertrophied epithelial cells (podocytes)
(Habib et al., 1985). Denys-Drash patients who develop
WT usually have bilateral tumors and present earlier than
individualswith sporadic tumors, suggesting the presence
of a predisposing germline mutation in these individuals.
The genital abnormality described most often is male
pseudohermaphroditism, wherein children have either
ambiguous external genitalia or a normal female phenotype with an XY karyotype. Large deletions of 1lp13 are
not observed, and no abnormalities of the X or Y chromosomes have been detected (Jadresic et al., 1991). Many
of these children have streak gonads, and several cases
have developed gonadoblastomas. The pattern of inheritance in Denys-Drash syndrome is sporadic and, if dominant, unlikely to be transmitted.
The localized expression of WT1 in the developing glomeruli (i.e., epithelial cells) (Pritchard-Jones et al., 1990)
and its implication in genital system development (Pritchard-Jones et al., 1990; Pelletier et al., 1991c) suggested
to us that Denys-Drash syndrome could be a single gene
defect involving WT1. In this report, we present our analysis of the WT1 gene in ten individuals with Denys-Drash
syndrome. Exon 9 of WT1 (which encodes the third zinc
finger domain) is a "hot spot" for mutations associated
with this syndrome. Nine out of ten independent cases
analyzed have specific point mutations in exon 9 of the WT1
gene. These mutations affect the DNA-binding properties

of WT1. Our results indicate that Denys-Drash syndrome
is the consequence of dominant-negative mutations to the
WT1 gene.

Results
Single-Strand Conformational Polymorphism
Analysis of the WT1 Gene in Individuals'with
Denys-Drash Syndrome
We analyzed the WT1 gene in individuals with DenysDrash syndrome to determine whether germline mutations
could account for their genital and glomerular abnormalities as well as their predisposition toward developing
Wilms' tumor. Genomic DNA was isolated from EBVtransformed lymphocytes or peripheral blood lymphocytes
from ten individuals with Denys-Drash syndrome. Many
of these individuals had the classical triad of Denys-Drash
syndrome, consisting of renal failure due to diffuse mesangial sclerosis, pseudohermaphroditism, and Wilms' tumor.
Several individuals have undergone prophylactic nephrectomy to prevent development of Wilms' tumor. Extensive
analysis by pulsed field gel electrophoresis and Southern
blotting failed to detect any deletions or rearrangements
within the WT1 gene of these individuals (J. Pelletier and
W. Bruening, data not shown). We then used the more
sensitive assay of single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) to search for single base pair mutations
within the WT1 gene. This technique is based on the principle that under nondenaturing conditions, single-stranded
DNA assumes a sequence-specific folded structure maintained by sequence-dependent local intramolecular interactions (Orita et al., 1989). Sequence changes are thus
detected as mobility shifts due to changes in the folded
conformations of the separated strands, allowing detection of even single base substitutions.
The exon/intron structure of the WT1 gene has recently
been determined (Haber et al., 1991). Oligonucleotides
flanking the exons of the WT1 gene were radiolabeled and
used to amplify, by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
each individual WT1 exon. No differences were observed
for the individuals studied for any exon except exons 8
and 9. However, a striking pattern of mobility shifts was
observed when single-stranded DNA from the PCR reactions of exon 9 (zinc finger Ill) are analyzed on neutral
polyacrylamide gels (Figure 1A). Analysis of the exon 9
PCR products from genomic DNA of all Denys-Drash individuals, with the exception of two (S. V. and W. Y.), demonstrated a product comigrating with the normal human PCR
product (indicated by an arrowhead) and an altered migrating PCR product (indicated by an arrow) (Figure 1A, lanes
3 to 11). PCR products from individuals S. V. and W. Y.
produced a mobility shift pattern similar to that obtained
from the nonaffected DNA sample (Figure 1A, compare
lanes 5 and 11 with lane 2). PCR-SSCP analysis of exon
8 (zinc finger domain II) from patient S. V. revealed a novel
altered migrating fragment (indicated by an arrow, Figure
1B, compare lane 3 with lane 2). These results strongly
implicate mutations in the zinc finger segments of the WT1
gene in the pathophysiology of Denys-Drash syndrome.

Germline Mutationsin WT1 in Denys-Drash Syndrome
439

A.

Figure 1. PCR-SSCP Analysis of WTI Exons
8 and 9 in Individualswith Denys-Drash Syn~d ~ m - ; u J uJ
drome
Z
PCR-SSCP analysisof the WT1genewas performed as describedin the ExperimentalProcedures. The design of the oligonucleotides
flankingexons 8 and 9 are basedon the intron
sequencepublishedby Haberet al. (t 990) and
are as follows. (A-2)9, 5'-GGAATTCAATTT1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6
I
J
CATTCCACAATAG-3' and (S-2)9,5'-GGAA'I-I'I
I
~
j
EXON 9
EXON8
~-xo~
CCTCACTGTGCCCACAI-rG-3'for exon9 and
(A-2)8, 5'-GGAATTCAACACAGCTGCCAGCAATG-3'and (S-2)8, 5'-GGAATTCGAGATCCCTTTCCAGT-3'for exon 8. EcoRI sites were engineered
into the oligonucleotidesto facilitate subcloning of PCR products. For the PCR of exon 9, an annealingtemperature of 57°C was used, and
oligonucleotide(A-2)9 was kinased for the analysis presented in (A) and (C). For the PCR of exon 8, oligonucleotide(A-2)8 was kinased and the
PCR performedat 55°C. The individualsfrom which genomic DNA was purifiedare indicatedaboveeach lane.The lane labeledas control indicates
the PCR performedon DNA from an unaffectedindividual,whereas=Nonden."refersto the absenceof denaturingtreatmentto the normalsample.
This nondenaturedsample was resuspendedin 1 x TBE loading dye and used to delineatethe positionof migrationof the double-strandedDNA
product (not visible on these photographicmounts).The exon 9 PCR product from the control unaffected human DNA sample demonstratesa
specificsingle-strandedconformationalspeciesnot presentwhen the sampleis not denatured(comparelane2 with lane 1). The higher background
observedin the control lane is due to a higherconcentrationof genomicDNA in the PCR than was used in the other samples.Notethat PCR analysis
of exons9 or 8 in morethan 30 normalindividualsneverrevealedan alteredmigratingPCR product.The arrowindicatesthe positionof the fragment
with the altered mobility, whereasthe arrowheadindicatesthe positionof migrationof the PCR productfrom normal DNA. For reasonsnot clearly
understood,in some cases the intensityof the mutant band is sometimesobservedto be greater than the normal band in heterozygotas,despite
the expectationof equal intensity for both alleles.
a.

C.

Sequence Analysis of WT1 in Individuals with
Denys-Drash Syndrome
The sequence of the respective exons of the Denys-Drash
individuals that produced the mobility shifts by SSCP analysis (Figure 1) were determined as described in the Experimental Procedures. Direct sequencing of the PCR product
from exon 8 of patient S. V. (Figure 1B) revealed a G to A
transition within the second zinc finger domain of one WT1
allele (Figure 2A). This mutation results in the conversion
of 3~Arg to His (Figure 2A). Sequencing of PCR products
of individuals showing mobility shifts of exon 9 revealed
that the majority of these patients (A. M., C. B., A. U.,
P. I., S. E., and R. S.) carry the same hemizygous mutation
(Figure 2B and data not shown). These individuals all carried the identical point mutation (C to T transition) in exon
9 of one WT1 allele (Figure 2B). This mutation converts
3~Arg to Trp within the third zinc finger domain of WT1
(Figure 2B). The affected amino acid residue is conserved
in WT1 zinc fingers II, III, and IV and corresponds to the
same residue altered in zinc finger II of S. V. Patients
B. E. and W. Y. show different mutations within exon 9,
both of which affect the same amino acid--3~Asp (Figure
2B). One mutation converts 3-~Asp to Gly, whereas the
other converts ~eAsp to Asn. These results, summarized
in Figure 2, suggest an important functional role for these
amino acids in WT1 function. Although the PCR product
of exon 9 from W. Y. failed to demonstrate a mobility shift
by nondenaturing gel analysis, a mutation was found when
exon 9 was analyzed by direct PCR sequencing. Table 1
summarizes these results and compares the phenotypes
characterized for each of the individuals with Denys-Drash
syndrome studied.
Genetic Models for Denys-Drash Syndrome
.The identification of mutations in the WT1 gene in DenysDrash patients poses the issue of mode of inheritance
in this syndrome. Denys-Drash syndrome might show a
recessive mode of inheritance, with the rare occurrence of

the syndrome a consequence of the inheritance of infrequent mutant alleles at the WT1 locus from each parent.
However, as noted above, we observed no additional
SSCP gel shifts in the WT1 gene in any individual studied,
suggesting that no additional mutations in either allele of
the WT1 gene are present in these Denys-Drash patients.
To further examine this possibility, we analyzed all the ten
coding exons of patient A. M. by direct PCR sequencing
and found no other mutation in either alleles (W. Bruening
and J. Pelletier, data not shown). Our results thus appear
most consistent with a dominant mode of inheritance for
Denys-Drash syndrome. Each of the ten cases we have
analyzed is an independent occurrence of Denys-Drash
syndrome. We suggest that each case represents a new
mutation in the WT1 gene. If the penetrance of the WT1
alleles we have analyzed is very high, then it is extremely
unlikely that parents of Denys-Drash individuals will carry
such mutations. In two families we have tested this view.
As shown in Figure 1C (lanes 1-6), neither parents of patients C. B. or B. E. carry the mutant allele of their affected
child. As predicted, by a dominant model for inheritance
with high penetrance, patients C. B. and B. E. represent
occurrences of de novo mutation in the WT1 gene.

Analysis of Tumors from Individuals with
Denys-Drash Syndrome
M. W. and R. S. are young children with Denys-Drash
syndrome (see Table 1). PCR-SSCP analysis of WT1 exon
9 from their peripheral lymphocyte DNA revealed a mobility shift pattern similar to that observed for the majority of
other Denys-Drash individuals (Figure 3A, lanes 3 and 4).
Both individuals carry the same exon 9 germiine point
mutation found in the majority of other Denys-Drash individuals studied in this report (see Table 1), which converts
3~Arg to Trp at the amino acid level (data not shown for
M. W.). M. W. and R. S. both have been treated for Wilms'
tumor (see Table 1). We used PCR-SSCP analysis to investigate the status of the WT1 gene in the tumors from

Cell
44O

A
G

A T C

Figure 2. SequenceAnalysisofPCRProducts
from Exons8 and 9 ShowingAlteredMobility
from Denys-DrashIndividuals
Sequencesof PCR productswere determined
eitherby directsequencingor fromsequencing
subclones of PCR products, as described in
the ExperimentalProcedures.For all DenysDrash individualsdescribedin this paper, the
sequence of PCR subclones has been confirmed by direct PCR sequencing. (A) Sequence analysisof S. V. showingan arginine
to tryptophanchangewithinexon8 of WT1.(B)
Sequenceanalysisof A. M., B. E., and W. Y.
showingpoint mutationsin exon9 of WT1.Patients C. B., A. U., P. I., S. E., R. S., and M. W.
hadthe samemutationas A. M., as determined
by direct PCR sequencing(data not shown).
These mutationsare schematicallypresented
to the rightof the sequencinggels.The nucleotide numbersystemis basedon the codingsequenceonlyand considersthe A of the initiator
ATG as +1. The numbersystem for the amino
acids considersthe initiatormethionineas +1.
Notethatthe signitureCys and His aminoacids
for the zinc fingers are underlined for emphasis.

ZnttE-2

jl~3__ H~ (10e3~5'TGTGACTTCAAGGACTGTGAACGAAGGTTTTCT
CGTTCAGACCAGCTCAA
A
35~ O F K D C E R R F $ R S D Q L " " K ~

R H Q

R R b

Normal

Lymphocyte
Z n4+ E - 3
G

AT

C

~

,?

(115~)5'TGTAAAACTTGTCAGCGAAAGTTCTCCCGGTCCGACCACCTGAAG
38,~ K T ~ Q R t~ F S R S DL H L ~ - -~

~ A C C CACACCAGGACTCAT3'
T

B.E

(~ A

T

H T

R

T

EL

C

396Asp--Asn

M. W. and R. S. These samples were available to us only
as paraffin-embedded tumor blocks. PCR-SSCP analysis
of WT1 exon 9 on sections from each tumor was performed
as described in the Experimental Procedures and revealed
that both tumors had lost the normal WT1 allele (Figure
3A, compare lane 3 with lane 5 and lane 4 with lane 6). A
third Denys-Dr,ash individual, C. B., as a child developed
Wilms' tumor, bilateral gonadoblastoma, and a juvenile
granulosa cell tumor (Table 1). This individual carries the
same germline point mutation in the WT1 gene as M. W.
and R. S. (see Figure 1A, lane 4). The Wilms' and juvenile
granulosa cell tumor from this individual demonstrated
loss of the normal WT1 allele when analyzed by PCRSSCP (Figure 3B, compare lanes 4 and 5 with lane 3).
These results implicate the WT1 gene in etiology of a nonWilms' tumor malignancy.

WT1 Denys-Drash Mutations Affect DNA Binding
The WT1 protein product has been shown to bind, in a
sequence-specific manner, to a sequence similar to that
recognized by the Early Growth Response-1 gene (EGR-1)
product, a zinc finger containing protein induced by mitogenic stimuli (Rauscher et al., 1990). We decided to use
the EGR-1 binding site (5'-CGCCCCCGC-3~ (Cao et al.,
1990) to determine whether any of the mutations we had
identified in Denys-Drash individuals affected WT1 bind-

ing. Two mutations were rebuilt into the WT1 cDNA: the
~18°Cto) T transition converting 394Argto Trp (the resulting
protein product is referred to as WTl(394W)); and the "SeG
to A transition, which substitutes an Asn for 396Asp (the
resulting protein product is referred to as WTI(~N)).
These mutations were reconstructed in a murine WT1
cDNA lacking both alternatively spliced exons as described in the Experimental Procedures. The third zinc
finger domain is 100% conserved at the amino acid level
between human and murine cDNAs (Buckler et al., 1991).
In vitro transcription using SP6 RNA polymerase generated capped mRNA transcripts corresponding to each
WT1 cDNA, as well as to an EGR-1 cDNA that served as
a positive control. Translation of these synthetic mRNA
species in the presence of [35S]methionine yielded polypeptides of the expected molecular mass (Figure 4A).
To assess the effect of the Denys-Drash mutations on
WTl-binding activity, gel-shift assays were performed using Egr-1 and WTI products synthesized in reticulocyte
lysates. An oligonucleotide(EG R), described in the Experimental Procedures, that contains the Egr-1 core consensus binding site was used in our mobility shift assays. In
addition, a second oligonucleotide (M2), which contains a
single base substitution and does not bind to Egr-1 or WT1
proteins (Rauscher et al., 1990), was synthesized and
used as a negative control in our assays. The Egr-1 protein

Germline Mutations in WT1 in Denys-Drash Syndrome
441

Table 1. Summaryof Phenotypesand WT1 GermlineMutationsAssociatedwith Denys-Drash Individuals
External
Patient Genitalia
A.M.

InternalReproductive
Organs

Nephropathy' Wilms'Tumor Gonadoblastoma Karyotype WT1 Mutation

Ambiguous Not known

+

C.B.

Ambiguous Rightgonad--dysgenictestis
Left gonad--dysgenictestis
BilateralM011erian,
No Wolffian structures

+

S.V.

Female

Right gonad-dysgenic testis
Left gonad-streak
No MQIlerianstructures
No Wolffian structures

+

A.U.

Female

ND

P.I.

Ambiguous Rightgonad--dysgenictestis
Left gonad--normaltestis
Bicornuateduterus

S.E.

+b

-

ND

394Argto Trp

Bilateral;
UnilateralJGCT

46,XY

394Argto Trp

+

46,XY

3~Arg to His

+

Bilateral

46,XX

394Argto Trp

+

+

46,XY

394Argto Trp

Female

Normalovary attachedto anterior pole +
of kidney; normaluterus

+

46,XX

~4Arg to Trp

ND

.....

B.E.

Female

+

_c

46,XX

~6Aspto Gly

W.Y.

Ambiguous No MQIlerianstructures
Left Wolffian structures

+

+

46,XY

~Asp to Ash

M.W.

Female

+

+

46,XX

~Arg to Trp

R.S.

Ambiguous Rightgonads--dysgenictestis
Left gonad--dysgenictestis

+

+

46,XY

~4Arg to Trp

Right gonad--dysgenic
Left gonad--streak
Normal fallopiantubes,
uterus and vagina

ND, not determined;+, unilateral;-, no tumor; JGCT, juvenile granulosacell tumor.
aThe nephropathyis commonlydescribedas focal or diffuse mesangialsclerOsis.
bAfter her first Wilms' tumor, C.B. underwentprophylacticnephrectomy,gonadectomy,and hysterectomy.
c Kidneyswere removedat 14 monthsof age.

is capable of forming specific complexes with the Egr-1
consensus sequence (denoted by arrows, Figure 4B; compare lanes 2 and 1). These complexes are specifically inhibited by a 10-fold molar excess of unlabeled EGR oligonucleotide (lane 3), but not by an equivalent amount of
M2 oligonucleotide (lane 4). As previously reported, Egr-1
does not bind to 32p-labeled M2 oligonucleotide (lane 5)
(Rauscher et al., 1990). The results demonstrate the specificity of our assay system.
The Wilms' tumor gene product is capable of binding to
32p-labeled EGR oligonucleotide, although at a significantly reduced efficiency compared to Egr-1 (Figure 4C,
lane 2). This lower binding efficiency is observed despite
a ,~40-fold excess of WT1 protein (as determined by TCA
precipitation of parallel in vitro translation reactions and
~=tandardizing for methionine content). The WT1 binding
is also specifically inhibited by a 10-fold molar excess of
unlabeled EGR oligonucleotide(lane 3), but is not inhibited
by an equivalent amount of M2 oligonucleotide (lane 4).
WT1 does not bind to 32p-labeled M2 oligonucleotide (lane
5). Neither of the two mutant WT1 protein products,
WTI(3-~W) or VMTI(3~N), are capable of binding to the
EGR-1 consensus sequence (lanes 6 and 7, respectively).
Our results demonstrate that the mutations we have characterized in Denys-Drash individuals result in polypeptides that can no longer efficiently bind DNA with the sequence specificity of the normal polypeptide. These

altered peptide products could behave either in a
dominant-negative fashion by sequestering a polypeptide
required for WT1 function or in a gain-of-function manner
by activating or repressing genes not normally under WT1
control.
Discussion
The identification of mutations in the zinc finger region of
WT1 in patients with the severe developmental abnormalities of Denys-Drash syndrome provides a framework for
understanding the role of the WT1 gene in controlling cell
differentiation and proliferation. The cells of the developing kidney that express the highest levels of the WT1
gene product (glomerular epithelial cells) are precisely
those cells that are the precursors to the aberrant structures observed in the nephropathic kidneys of DenysDrash syndrome. The pathology of Denys-Drash syndrome involves hypertrophy of these cells. It is thus not
unreasonable to presume that disturbances of WT1 function in these cells are the cause of their aberrant differentiation and hence that the normal role of WT1 is to initiate
a transcriptional program that controls the differentiation
of these cells. The renal failure observed in these individuals would therefore be secondary to processes affecting
glomerular development during embryogenesis.
Similarly, the WT1 gene product expression in cells of

Cell
442

A.

a.

•

1 2

3

4

I-

I--

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 3. PCR-SSCP Analysis of WT1 Exon 9 in Wilms' Tumors and
a Juvenile Granulosa Cell Tumor from Individuals with Denys-Drash
Syndrome
PCR-SSCP analysis on tumor tissue sections were performed as described in the Experimental Procedures. The arrow indicates the position of the fragment with the altered mobility, whereas the arrowhead
indicates the position of the migration of the PCR product from normal
DNA. The individuals from which genomic DNA was purified are indicated above each lane. The lane labeled as control indicates the PCR
performed on DNA from an unaffected individual, whereas "Nonden."
refers to the absence of denaturing treatment to the normal sample.
This nondenatured sample was resuspended in 1 x TBE loading dye
and used to delineate the position of migration of the double-stranded
DNA product (not visible on these photographic mounts). WT, Wilms'
tumor; JGCT, juvenile granulosa cell tumor. The mobility of the DNA
PCR product of the JGCT and the WT were not affected by the presence of materials from the tissue sections, since a reamplification by
PCR gave a DNA fragment of identical mobility in SSCP gel in each
case•

the developing gonad correlates with the disordered sexual differentiation observed in Denys-Drash syndrome.
Genitourinary anomalies are relatively common in the general population, and their expression varies enormously
among Denys-Drash patients. Normally in males, the
Wolffian ducts give rise to the epididymis, vas deferens,
and seminal vesicles during embryogenesis whereas in
females, the MQIlerian ducts will give rise to the fallopian
tubes, uterus, and upper vagina. That Deny,s-Drash patients have both sets of internal structure implies a key role
for WT1 in primary sex determination. The proper signals
for regression of the MQIlerian ducts, as well as development of the Wolffian structures, are not present during
development in Denys-Drash individuals with a 46,XY
karyotype (see Table 1). The spectrum of genital system
anomalies range from streak ovaries to dysgenic testis
and the absence or presence of Wolffian or MQIlerian
structures (see Table 1). Even individuals carrying the
same mutation (Table 1; e.g., S. E. and M. W.) show variability in expressivity (S. E. has a normal ovary, whereas
M. W. has streak gonads), which may be due to additional
genetic factors.
Mutations in the WT1 gene in Denys-Drash patients
must do more than reduce WT1 gene dosage by eliminating the function of one allele of the WT1 gene. A wellcharacterized class of patients, those with the WAGR syndrome, have reduced dosage of the WT1 gene owing to
• large or small intragenic deletions, which include the WT1
gene. The developmental effects of reduction of WT1 dos-

Figure 4. Translation Products and Mobility
Shift Assays with In Vitro Synthesized Egr-1
and WT1 Proteins
(A) Translation products obtained from EGR-1
÷
÷
._d '7 'T, '7 'T
and WT1 mRNAs. Messenger RNAs were
i
96ku
~
LU
translated in vitro as described in the Experimental Procedures. Protein products were anu
alyzed directly by electrophoresis on 10%
SDS-polyacrylamidegels and visualized by fluorography.
46(B) Mobility shift assay with in vitro synthesized
1
2
3
4
5
Egr-1 protein products. Gel retardation assays
Probe:
"4
EGR
+
÷
+
+
were performed using Egr-1 synthesized in
M2
~-'
+
vitro and either a ~P-labeled oligonucleotide
(EGR) containing the Egr-1 consensus binding
30Co
site (Cao at al., 1990) or a ~P-labeled oligonuLu
cleotide (M2) that does not bind to Egr-1
(Rauscher et al., 1990). Figure 4B, lane 1, retic20+ .,_ ~_ .-- ulocyte lysate without exogenous RNA incu1
2
3
4
5
bated with ~P-labeled EGR; lane 2, reticulocyte lysate containing Egr-1 protein and
32P-labeled EGR; lane 3, reticulocyte lysate
containing Egr-1 protein, 32P-labeledEGR, and
a 10-fold molar excess of unlabeled EGR oligoi!ii~i~i!!~ii!~!!i~iiii!!: if!~¸ ~ii ~ ~~ !i~!i ~
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
nucleotide; lane 4, reticulocyte lysate conProbe:
EGR
+
+
+
+
+
+
taining Egr-1 protein, 32P-labeledEGR, and a
10-fold molar excess of unlabeled M2 oligonuM2
+
cleotide; lane 5, reticulocyte lysate containing
Egr-1 protein and ~P-labeled M2.
(C) Mobility shift assay with in vitro synthesized WT1 protein products. Lane 1, reticulocyte lysate without exogenous RNA incubated with ~P-labeled
EGR; lane 2, reticulocyte lysate containing W'rl protein and ~P-labeled EGR; lane 3, reticulocyte lysate containing WT1 protein, ~P-labeled EGR,
and a 10-fold molar excess of unlabeled EGR oligonucteotide; lane 4, reticulocyte lysate containing WT1 protein, 32P-labeledEGR, and a 10-fold
molar excess of unlabeled M2 oligonucleotide; lane 5, reticulocyte lysate containing WT1 protein and ~P-labeled M2; lane 6, reticulocyte lysate
containing WTI(~W) protein and =P-labeled EGR oligonucleotide; lane 7, reticulocyte lysate containing WTI(~N) protein and ~P-labeled EGR
oligonucleotide. The arrows indicate the Egr-I-DNA complexes and the WT1-DNA complex. The lower band represents a nonspecific DNA-protein
complex, since it is observed in all samples including reticulocyte lysate without exogenously added mRNA (lane 1).
A.

B.

n-

Germline Mutationsin WT1 in Denys-DrashSyndrome
443

age in WAGR patients are, in general, less severe than
the effects of WT1 mutations in Denys-Drash patients.
The most common developmental lesions associated with
hemizygosity at WT1 in males are hypospadias and cryptorchidism. The constellation of anomalies in DenysDrash syndrome includes renal failure, pseudohermaphroditism, and Wilms' tumor. The renal failure associated
with this syndrome is the result of progressive glomerular
sclerosis and occurs within the first few years of life (Habib
et al., 1985). The much more severe disruption on development of the genital system in Denys-Drash syndrome than
observed in WAGR syndrome supports the notion that
germline dominant-negative or gain-of-function lesions at
the WT1 locus have a more pronounced effect on development than a reduction of WT1 dosage. The fact that individuals with WAGR syndrome do not develop nephropathies
suggests that the renal system is not as sensitive as the
genital system to a reduction in WT1 dosage during embryogenesis.
We have analyzed three Wilms' tumors and one granuIosa cell tumor from three individuals with Denys-Drash
syndrome and have found that all have undergone reduction to homozgosity for the mutated WT1 copy. Previous
studies of WTs associated with Denys-Drash syndrome
also show reduction to homozygosity for 1 l p (Schroeder
et al., 1987; Dao et al., 1987). Hereditary Wilms' tumors,
which account for less than 5% of all WT cases, were
essential in formulating the "two hit" mutational model of
tumorigenesis (Knudson and Strong, 1972). According to
this model, the majority of sporadic tumors develop following two somatic mutational events within the same target
cell, while hereditary cases (bilateral and familial) develop
because these individuals carry a germline mutation at
the appropriate locus, and only one additional somatic
mutational event is required. Our findings in tumors of
Denys-Drash individuals are consistent with this hypothesis. The WT1 mutations observed in Denys-Drash are
dominant in their effects on urogenital development. However, the dominant effect of these mutations in tumorigenesis is more difficult to establish. The fact that all DenysDrash tumors that we examined show loss of the wild-type
allele indicates a growth advantage to cells that have no
normal WT1 gene product. Similar observations regarding
the loss of the wild-type allele in colorectal tumors have
been made for p53 mutations known to act by a dominantnegative mechanism (Baker et al., 1989). Dominant mutations of WT1 may lead to tumorigenesis without requiring
loss of the normal allele, as demonstrated by a sporadic
Wilms' tumor that had a WT1 mutation deleting zinc finger
III yet retained the normal WT1 allele (Haber et al., 1990).
The data presented here support a central role for the
WT1 transcription factor in the control of at least two differentiation programs. Although many transcription factors
have been described to date, only two have been implicated in a direct manner in the control of human development. Germline mutations within the testis-determining
gene (SRY) in humans have been found in individuals with
anomalies in genital system development (Berta et al.,
1990; J&ger et al., 1990). Vortkamp et al. (1991) have described translocations in Greig syndrome, an autosomal

dominant disorder affecting limb and craniofacial development in humans, disrupting the GL13 zinc finger gene.
Our description of mutations within WT1 that result in
abnormal development, as well as predisposing to Wilms'
tumors (and possibly granulosa cell tumors), provides a
direct link between development and oncogenesis. WT1
is unique in its demonstrated role in both tumor suppression and development. Individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome do not have developmental anomalies (Malkin et
al., 1990; Srivastava et al., 1990). Likewise, no developmental anomalies have been described for individuals carrying germline mutations in the retinoblastoma predisposing gene. It will clearly be of interest to determine whether
WT1 is representative of a class of tumor suppressor genes
that play a central role in controlling cell differentiation.
What is the effect of the mutations we have described
on WT1 function? We have tested two of the Denys-Drash
mutations in a DNA mobility shift assay (Figure 4). The
WT1 protein product binds the Egr-1 consensus sequence
(5'-GCGGGGGCG-3') (Figure 4C). This functional assay
permitted us to determine that both mutations within WT1
zinc finger III tested are not competent for DNA binding.
Pavletich and Pabo (1991) have determined the crystal
structure of a complex containing the three zinc fingers
from Zif268 (also known as Egr-1) and a consensus DNAbinding site. Their results show that the zinc fingers bind
in the major groove of B-DNA and that most of the contacts
are made with the guanine-rich strand. Because of the
conserved nature of the zinc fingers between WT1 and
Egr-1, WT1 presumably behaves in a similar manner. Important side chains involved in these contacts would include an arginine that immediately precedes an a helix
and that hydrogen bonds with a guanine (highlighted in the
Egr-1 recognition sequence: 5'-GCGGGGGCG-3') (see
Figures 5A and 5B). This is the same arginine that is found
mutated in the majority of Denys-Drash individuals and
results in loss of DNA binding. It is of interest to note that
the control oligonucleotide we used (M2:5'-GCGGGTGCG-3') does not bind to WT1 or Egr-1 (Figures 4B and
4C) and affects the guanine that hydrogen bonds with this
arginine. This arginine contact is stabilized by a conserved
aspartic acid that occurs as the second residue in each of
the a helices (Pavletich and Pabo, 1991). It is striking that
in the only two Denys-Drash individuals who do not carry
an Arg mutation within zinc finger II or III, the amino acid
affected is the aspartic acid residue two residues downstream of the arginine group discussed above. Both oxygens of the carboxylate group of the aspartic acid are
thought to be in a hydrogen bond-salt bridge interaction
with the N, and N, of the guanidinium group of the arginine
(Pavletich and Pabo, 1991) (Figure 5B). This interaction is
essential for DNA recognition, since replacement of aspartic acid for asparagine in the WT1 cDNA negated DNA
sequence recognition (Figure 4C). This interaction is
thought to stabilize the long side chain of arginine and
enhance the specificity of the arginine-guanine contacts
(Pavletich and Pabo, 1991).
The nature of the mutations we have described for individuals with Denys-Drash syndrome is striking. The
394Argto Trp mutation may represent a hot spot within the

Cell
444

A.
W T I Zinc
Fmaer *3

TGTAAAACTTGTCAC,CGAAAGTI'L'TCCCGGTCCGACCACCTGAAGACCCACACCAC'GACTCAT

3.1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

5

HUUHUUHU H
Fin F1F]nF]
B.
~..~#,,~,,0 ~

3~Asp

394Arg

I

G-4

Figure 5. Predicted Base Contacts Made by WT1
(A) The schematic diagram illustrates the predictions based on the
X-ray crystallography data of Pavlstich and Pabo (1991), obtained by
cocrystallizing a WTl-related zinc finger protein (Zif 268) and a consensus DNA-binding site. The DNA recognition sequence is presented as
a "zipper", and the numbers above the guanine-rich strand refer to
nucleotide position. 394Arg is predicted to interact with G-4 on the
guanine-rich DNA strand as described in the text. ~THis is predicted
to hydrogen bond to G-5 according to Pavlstich and Pabo (1991). The
Cys and His amino acids involved in coordinating a zinc atom are
underlined.
(B) Predicted hydrogen bond contacts between ~4Arg and ~Asp and
the guanine base. Hydrogen bonding contact between ~4Arg and
~Asp is predicted to stabilize the ~Arg-G-4 contacts as described in
the text and pointed out by Pavletich and Pabo (1991).

WTI gene susceptible to mutagenic events. The C to T
transition at this site arose in the context of a CpG dinucleotide and likely resulted from the deamination of 5-methylcytosine at this position. The location of the other mutations within zinc fingers II and III represents a very
restricted set of the possible mutations that might abrogate
DNA binding of the zinc fingers. Why are so specific a set
of mutational sites observed in Denys-Drash syndrome?
Perhaps these sites are the most prone to mutagenesis.
Alternatively, it is possible that the zinc fingers of WT1
carry out other functions besides DNA binding such as
nuclear localization, dimerization, or interaction with other
polypeptides. If this were the case, it is possible that mutations at other sites than those observed might disrupt a
second function of the zinc fingers and prevent the mutant
polypeptide from causing a dominant effect. A third alternative is that the dominant effects of WT1 mutations in
Denys-Drash syndrome are due to the acquisition of the
mutant polypeptide with the capacity to bind to previously
unrecognized DNA sequences, causing disruptions in the
transcriptional program. According to this scenario, only
mutations at specific sites in the DNA binding domain
might cause such gain of function. Our study raises the
possibility that mutations in the WT1 gene may have im-

pact in a broader range of contexts than have been previously thought. For example, the description of familial
incidence of glomerulopathy associated with male pseudohermaphroditism (Frasier et al., 1964) and two siblings
with WT (Zunin and Soave, 1965) may provide examples
of incomplete penetrance of Denys-Drash WT1 mutations.
Current experiments are in progress to determine whether
WT1 is altered in familial cases of diffuse mesangial sclerosis with and without other features of Denys-Drash syndrome. Our results suggest that WT1 function may be abrogated in non-Wilms' tumor malignancies, as we have
shown for a juvenile granulosa cell tumor from a DenysDrash individual. Ovarian tumors of the granulosa cell type
should clearly be one focus of such studies. The WT1 mutations we have described for Denys-Drash syndrome are
predicted to act in a dominant-negative or gain-of-function
fashion. These mutations directly affect the DNA-binding
properties of WT1 and also clearly implicate a role for WT1
in urogenital development.
It is of interest to note that the binding affinity of the WT1
polypeptide for the Egr-1 recognition sequence is at least
40-fold lower than the affinity of Egr-1 for this sequence.
It is thus possible that the correct recognition sequence
for WT1 is related but not identical to the Egr-1 recognition
sequence. Of particular interest would be the identification
of genes controlled by WT1. This would permit the identification of relevant DNA-binding sites for WT1 from a functional point of view and would permit the more direct analysis of the genetic program that WT1 controls.
These results provide a clear example of a recessive oncogene that is mutated in a hereditary human malformation.
Experimental Procedures

Materials
Restriction endonucleaseswere purchasedfrom New EnglandBioLabs..Calf intestinealkalinalphosphatasewas obtainedfrom Boehringer Mannheim.The Klenowfragmentof DNA polymerase,T4 DNA
polymerase,T4 polynucleotidekinase,and T4 DNA ligasewerefrom
New England BioLabs. 5-3H-cytidinetriphosphate (21.8 Ci/mmol),
[~S]methionine(>1000Ci/mmol),a-=P-deoxycytidine5'-triphosphate
(".,3000 Ci/mmol), [~S]deoxyadenosinetriphosphate(1000-1500Ci/
m=mol),and 7-32P-adenosinetriphosphate(1000-3000Ci/mmol)were
obtainedfrom New EnglandNuclear.SP6 RNA polymeraseand human placentaRNAaseinhibitorwerefrom PromegaBiotec.Taq polymerasewas purchasedfromCetus, and PerfectMatchwas from Stratagene, m7GpppGand poly(dl-dC)-poly(dl-dC)were purchasedfrom
P. L. Biochemicals.
General Methods

Preparationof plasmid DNA, restrictionenzymedigestion,agarose
gel electrophoresisof DNA, oligonucleotidelabeling of DNA, DNA
end-labeling,DNA ligation,and bacterialtransformationwerecarried
out using standard methods(Sambrooket al., 1989 and references
therein). Subclonesof DNA PCR amplificationproducts cloned into
pKS I1+(Stratagene)weresequencedbythe chainterminationmethod
(Sangeret al., 1977)usingSequenasepolymerase(U. S. Biochemical).
T7 and T3 sequencingprimers, obtainedfrom the M.I.T. Biopolymer
Center, were used to prime the sequencingreactions.No less than
sevencloneswere sequencedto ensureagainstTaq polymeraseartifacts and determinethe sequenceof both alleles at specific loci.
Cell Lines and EBV Immortalization

Lymphocyteswereisolatedfromfreshlydrawnbloodand immortalized
with Epstein-Barrvirus (EBV)as previouslydescribed(Gladeand Beratis, 1976).Lymphoblastoidcell linesweregrownin Iscove'smedium
supplementedwith 15% fetal calf serum.

Germline Mutations in WT1 in Denys-Drash Syndrome
445

Genomic DNA Isolation
Genomic DNA was prepared from lymphoblastoid cell lines as follows.
Cells were washed twice in cold phosphate-buffered saline, centrifuged, and resuspended in TNE (10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 100 mM NaCI,
25 mM EDTA) containing 250 pg/ml proteinase K (BMC), 0.5% SDS,
and 0.05 mg/ml RNAase A. The DNA was extracted by gentle shaking
at 37°C for 14 hr. The lysate was extracted twice with buffer-saturated
(100 mM Tris [pH 8.0]) phenol, twice with buffer-saturated phenolchloroform [1/1], and twice with chloroform. Following the addition of
0.1 vol 3 M sodium acetate and 2.5 vol ethanol, the genomic DNA was
spooled out of solution, washed in 70% ethanol, and rasuspended in
T. E. (10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA). Samples were quantitated
by reading the absorbance at 260 nm.
Genomic DNA was isolated from blood samples (10 ml) as follows.
Samples were spun at 3000 rpm for 10 min in a Sorval Refrigerated
Table Top Centrifuge (RT-6000). The pellet was gently resuspended
in 1 ml of T. E., and 100 p.I of 0.5 M EDTA was added. The sample was
vortexed, and SDS was added to a final concentration of 4% and
incubated at 65°C for 10 rain. After the addition of proteinase K and
RNAase A to a final concentration of 1.6 mg/ml and 0.3 mg/ml, respectively, the samples were incubated at 65°C for 90 rain. Four milliliters
of T. E. was then added to the samples, which were phenol extracted
twice, phenol-chloroform extracted twice, chloroform extracted, and
the DNA recovered by ethanol precipitation.
Genomic DNA was isolated from tissues embedded in paraffin as
previously described (Wright and Manos, 1990). Briefly, sections (10
p.m) were scraped (,'~5 mm 2) from a glass microscope slide, placed
into an Eppendorf centrifuge tube, deparaffinized by washing twice in
xylene, once in 95% ethanol, once in 70% ethanol, and air dried. The
sample was resuspended in 100 ml of 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 4 mM
EDTA, 0.05% Tween 20, and incubated at 37°C in the presence of
proteinase K 100 p.g/ml. The sample was then phenol-chloroform,
chloroform extracted once, and half of the sample was used directly
for PCR analysis as described below.
PCR Amplification and SSCP Analysis
The PCR was performed using a DNA thermocycler (Perkin-ElmerCetus) with 0.1 p~g of genomic DNA in a total volume of 20 p.I. Thirty
cycles of amplification were carried out; each cycle consisted of I min
at 94°C, 1 min at the optimally determined annealing temperature for
each oligonucleotide pair, and 1 min at 72°C. Prior to the PCR, one
oligonucleotide was radiolabeled with T4 polynucleotide kinase and
['f-=P]ATP. After the reactions, aliquots of 2 p.I were mixed with 8 rtl
of 95% formamide, 20 mM EDTA, 0.05% bromophenol blue, 0.05%
xylene cyanol FF and boiled for 5 rain. Samples (2 p.I) were loaded
onto 80/0 polyacrylamide (50:1, acrylamide:bisacrylamide) gels, and
electrophoresis was carried out at 30 W in the cold room. The gel was
dried on filter paper and exposed to X-ray film at - 7 0 ° C for 6-12 hr
with an intensifying screen.
For direct sequencing of PCR products, PCR was performed as
described above using the following unlabeled oligonucleotides: for
exon 8: A8, 5'-CCCCGAATTCGI-ICTGTTGGTTTGCCAGG-3'and $8,
5'-CCCCAAGCTTGCCI-IAATGAGATCCCTTTCC-3'; for exon 9: A9,
5'-CCCCGAATICAAGATAGCCACGCACTAI-ICC-3' and $9, 5'CCCCAAGCTTCAGGAAATGCTGGGCTCC-3'. Amplifications were
performed at 55°C for 30 cycles, and the PCR products were purified
from a low-melting agarose gel as described (Langridge et al., 1980).
Thirty cycles of asymmetric PCR were performed using the oligonucleotides described in Figure 1, with an uneven molar ratio of the two
primers (100:1). The amplified mixture was diluted, phenol-chloroform
extracted, passed through a G50 spun-dialysis column, and ethanol
precipitated. One-fifth of the reaction mixture was used for dideoxy
sequencing using'a Sequenase kit (U. S. Biochemical), and the ~Pkinased oligonucleotide used at the lowest concentration in the asymmetric PCR. Products were analyzed on 6% polyacrylamide gels containing 7 M urea.
WTI Mutsgenesis and Expression Vectors
Plasmid pKS/mWT[-/-] contains the entire coding region of the WT1
murine cDNA (1290 nucleotidas [nts]) along with 41 nucieotides of
5'-noncoding and 110 nts of 3'-noncoding sequence. The WT1 murine
cDNA sequence has been previously reported (Buckler et al., 1991)
and the initiator methionine site defined (Pelletier et al., 1991). A mu-

rine cDNA clone lacking both alternative splice exons was restricted
with Sau 3AI (which cleaves 41 nts upstream of the initiator methionine
and 110 nts downstream of the stop codon [see Buckler etal., 1991]).
The 1441 bp fragment was separated from vector sequence by gel
electrophoresis in low temperature melting agarose. The appropriate
band was visualized and excised under long-wave UV light after staining the gel with ethidium bromide. DNA was purified from the agarose,
as previously described (Langridge et al., 1980). This Sau 3AI fragment
was then subcloned into the BamHI site of pBluescript II KS+. After
transformation of Escherichia coil strain HB101, and restriction analysis of plasmid DNA from individual clones, a clone was chosen whose
5' end was nearest the T3 promoter. This clone is referred to as pKSI
mWT[-/-].
Mutagenesis of WT1 was performed by PCR using two sets of primers, one primer from each pair targeting the desired sequence to be
changed and incorporating that desired nt change in its sequence. To
construct the ~ A r g to ~Trp mutant, the following sets of primers were
used: MW-4: [(nt 1119) 5'-CCTGCTCCTGAGGACG-3' (nt 1134)] and
MW-AS(R-W): [(nt 1674) 5'-CTTCAGATGGTCGGACCAGGAAAACTTTC-3' (nt 1642)], as well as MW-F: [(nt 1777) 5'-GGCGGACCAATTCGTC-3' (nt 1762)] and MW-S(R-W): [(nt 1645) 5'-CGAAAGII I ICCTGGTCCGACCATCTGAAG-3' (nt 1674)]. The nucleotide numbering scheme is based on the sequence of Buckler et al.
(1991). The bold nucleotides indicate the changes made at the nucieotide sequence level to result in conversion of the arginine codon to a
tryptophan codon. Oligonucleotidas MW-4 and MW-AS(R-W) as well
as MW-F and MW-S(R-W) were used in the PCR with pKS/mWT[-/
- ] as template. Annealing reactions were performed at 57°C in the
presence of PerfectMatch. The two resulting PCR products were gel
purified from a 30/o NuSieve gel (Langridge et al., 1980), mixed in a 1:1
molar ratio, and ,'~0.1 rig used in a second PCR using oligonucleotides
MW-F and MW-4. The resultant product was gel purified, restricted
with Bsu361 and BssHII, and subcloned into pKS/mWT[-/-], which had
been restricted with BssHII and Bsu361. Colonies were analyzed by
direct sequencing to ensure against the introduction of second site
mutations during the PCR. The same strategy was employed to construct the ~Asp to ~Asn mutation, except that oligonucleotides MW-4
and MW-F were used in combination with MW-AS(D-N): [(nt 1674)
5'-C'I-I'CAGATGGTTGGACCGGGAAAACTTTC-3' (nt 1642)] and MWS(D-N): [(nt 1645) 5'-CGAAAG i i i I CCCGGTCCAACCATCTGAAG-3'
(nt 1674)], respectively.

In Vitro Transcriptions and Translations
The vectors pKS/mWT[-/-], pKS/WT1 (~W), and pKS/W'I'I(~N) were
used as starting reagents to construct vectors with greater translational
efficiencies. The WT1 gene was excised from these plasmids as follows. Each vector was digested with Spel, which cuts upstream of the
WT gene, and within the polylinker of pBluescript II KS+. This was
filled in with DNA polymerase I (Klenow fragment) in the presence of
deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates, and blunt-end Ugated to EcoRI
linkers (5'-GGAAI-ICC-3~ using T4 DNA ligase. This mixture was then
digested with EcoRI and BamHI, and the resultant WT gene inserts
were gel purified as previously described (Langridge et al., 1980).
These inserts were then introduced into the EcoRI-BamHI sites of
pSP65-38A. This vector has been previously described (Munroe et al.,
1990) and was constructed by inserting 38 adenosines into the Pstl
site of the pSP65 polylinker. Any resultant synthetic mRNA species
made with SP6 polymerase on template linearized with Hindlll will
therefore contain a poly(A) tail, a feature important for mRNA stability
and translation (Munroe et al., 1990). The resultant plasmids were
referred to as pSP65(A)/mWT[-/-], pSP65(A)/WT1(~W), and pSP65
(A)/WTI(~N).
For in vitro transcriptions, these plasmids were linearized with
Hindlll. A control plasmid, p327, contains a 2.1 kb EGR-1 cDNA in the
Smal site of pBluescript II KS. This plasmid was linearized with Xbal.
After digestion, samples were phenol-chloroform (1:1; v/v) extracted,
passed over a G-50 spun-dialysis column, and ethanol precipitated.
Transcription reactions using pSP65 derivatives as template were carried out according to Green st al. (1983), except for the following modifications: 500 p.M m7GpppG was included in the reaction mix, and
the GTP concentration was lowered to 100 p.M in order to synthesize
capped mRNA transcripts. Ten microcurias of 5-3H-CTP was included
in the reaction mix to be used as tracer to quantitate mRNA yields.

Cell
446

Incubation times were 2 hr at 40°C. T3 transcriptions (Promega Biotech) using p327 were according to the manufacturer's recommendations with the above noted modifications.
RNA templates were translated in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate (50 p_l)
(Promega Biotech) in the presence or absence of [35S]methionine at
final concentrations of 16 p.g/ml. Unlabeled proteins were synthesized
in lysates supplemented with 20 p.M methionine. Translations were
performed at 30°C for 1 hr.

Gel Retardation Assay
Probes for the binding assay were prepared by annealing complementary synthetic oligonucleotides. The oligonucleotides were gel purified
after synthesis and annealed by heating to 90°C for 5 min in 50 mM
Tris HCI (pH 7.6), 10 mM MgCI2, 0.1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 75 mM NaCI
and allowed to slowly cool to room temperature. Annealed oligonucleotides were radiolabeled with T4 polynucleotide kinase and [7-32P]ATP
and purified from a 3°/o NuSieve gel as previously described (Langridge et al., 1980). The binding sites used were as follows: EGR,
5'-CGCCCTCGCCCCCGCGCCGGG-3' and M2, 5'-CGCCCTCGCACCCGCGCCGGG-3'.
Binding reactions for the gel retardation assay were set up in 10 p.I
by incubating 2.5 ng of end-labeled probe (20,000 cpm) and 1 p_g of
poly(dl-dC)-poly(dl-dC) with 3 p_lof EGR-1 or WTI programmed lysate.
The binding buffer was 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 70 mM KCI, 5 mM
MgCI2, 0.1% NP-40, 12% glycerol, 1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin, 0.5
mM dithiothreitol, 100 p.M ZnCI2. Each reaction mixture was preincubated at room temperature for 15 rain before the addition of radiolabeled probe. Complexes were given 15 rain at room temperature to
form and were resolved on a 5O/o polyacrylamide gel (30:1) in 0.5 x
TBE (1 x TBE is 0.089 M Tris-borate, 0.089 M boric acid, 2 mM EDTA)
at 140 V at 4°C. Gels were dried and exposed to Kodak X-ray film
at -70°C. For competition experiments, the specific amount of cold
oligonucleotide competitor was added to the lysate concurrent with the
addition of labeled DNA.
Acknowledgments
We wish to dedicate this manuscript to the memory of patient C. B.,
who recently passed away owing to secondary complications of
Denys-Drash syndrome. Although commonly referred to as Drash syndrome, we prefer the eponym of Denys-Drash syndrome, since this
constellation of anomalies was first described by Denys et al. (1967).
We thank Dr. Vincent Stanton for kindly reviewing pathological specimens, Drs. Tom Glaser and David Brook for helpful discussions and
comments during the course of this work, and Drs. Walter Mushynski
and Philippe Gros for critical review of the manuscript. We are grateful
to Drs. David Munroe and Vikas Sukhatme for their kind gifts of pSP6538A and p327, respectively. We are gratefully indebted to the patients,
their families, and treating physicians for having participated in this
study. J. P. wishes to thank the McGill Department of Biochemistry for
use of facilities and space. J. P. was supported by a postdoctoral
fellowship award from the Medical Research Council of Canada.
D. A. H. was supported by National Cancer Institute Clinical Investigator Award 1K08CA 01356. This research was supported by NIH grant
HG00299 awarded to D. E. H. and by National Cancer Institute and
Medical Research Council of Canada grants to J: P.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by
the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby
marked =advertisement' in accordance with 18 USC Section 1734
solely to indicate this fact.
Received September 9, 1991; revised September 20, 1991.

References
Baker, S. J., Fearon, E. R., Nigro, J. M., Hamilton, S. R., Preisinger,
A.C., Milburn Jessup, J., vanTuinen, P., Ledbetter, D. H., Barker,
D. F., Nakamura, Y., White, R., and Vogelstein, B. (1989). Chromosome 17 deletions and p53 gene mutations in colorectal carcinomas.
Science 244, 217-221.
Beckwith, J. B., Kiviat, N. B., and Bonadio, J. F. (1989). Nephrogenic
rests, nephroblastomatosis, and the pathogenesis of Wilms' tumor.
Ped. Pathol. 10, 1-36.

Berta, P., Hawkins, J. R., Sinclair, A. H., Taylor, A., Griffiths, B. L.,
Goodfellow, P. N., and Fellous, M. (1990). Genetic evidence equating
SRY and the testi-determining factor. Nature 348, 448-450.
Bond, J. V. (1975). Bilateral Wilms' tumor. Age at diagnosis, associated
congenital anomalies, and possible pattern of inheritance. Lancet 2,
482-484.
Breslow, N. E., and Beckwith, J. B. (1982). Epidemiological features
of Wilms' tumor: results of the National Wilms' Tumor Study. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 68, 429-436.
Breslow, N. E., Beckwith, J. B., Ciol, M., and Sharpies, K. (1988). Age
distribution of Wilms' tumor: report from the National ~Nilms' Tumor
Study. Cancer Res. 48, 1653-1657.
Buckler, A. J., Pelletier, J., Haber, D. A., Glaser, T., and Housman,
D. E. (1991). Isolation, characterization, and expression of the murine
Wilms' tumor gene (WT1) during kidney development. Mol. Cell. Biol.
11, 1707-1712.
Call, K. M., Glaser, T., Ito, C. Y., Buckler, A. J., Pelletier, J., Haber,
D. A., Rose, E. A., Kral, A., Yeger, H., Lewis, W. H., Jones, C., and
Housman, D. E. (1990). Isolation and characterization of a zinc finger
polypeptide gene at the human chromosome 11 Wilms' tumor locus.
Cell 60, 509-520.
Cao, X., Koski, R. A., Gashler, A., McKiernan, M., Morris, C. F., Gaffhey, R., Hay, R. V., and Sukhatme, V. P. (1990). Identification and
characterization of the Egr-f gene product, a DNA-binding zinc finger
protein induced by differentiation and growth signals. Mol. Cell. Biol.
10, 1931-1939.
Dao, D. D., Schroeder, W. T., Chao, L.-Y., Kikuchi, H., Strong, L. C.,
Riccardi, V. M., Pathak, S., Nichols, W. W., Lewis, W. H., and Saunders, G. F. (1987). Genetic mechanisms of tumor-specific loss of 1 lp
DNA sequences in Wilms' tumor. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41,202-217.
Davis, L. M., Zabel, B., Senger, G., L0decke, H.-J., Metzroth, B., Call,
K., Housman, D., Claussen, U., Horsthemke, B., and Shows, T. B.
(1991). A tumor chromosome rearrangement further defines the 1 lp13
Wilms' tumor locus. Genomics 10, 588-592.
Denys, P., Malvaux, P., van den Berghe, H., Tanghe, W., and Proesmans, W. (1967). Association d'un syndrome anatomo-pathologique
de pseudohermaphrodisme masculin, d'une tumeur de Wilms, d'une
nephropathie parenchymateuse et d'un mosaicisme XX/XY. Arch.
Fran. Ped. 24, 729-739.
Drash, A., Sherman, F., Hartmann, W. H., and Blizzard, R. M. (1970).
A syndrome of pseudohermaphroditism, Wilms' tumor, hypertension,
and degen'erative renal disease. J. Ped. 78, 585-593.
Frasier, S. D., Bashore, R. A., and Mosier, H. D. (1964). Gonadoblastoma associated with pure gonadal dysgenesis in monozygous twins.
J. Ped. 64, 740-745.
Gessler, M., Poustka, A., Cavenee, W., Neve, R. L., Orkin, S. H., and
Brun~t~ G. A. P. (1990). Homozygous deletion in Wilms' tumors of a
zinc-finger gene identified by chromosome jumping. Nature 343, 774778.
Glade, P. R., and Beratis, N. G. (1976). Long-term lymphoid cell lines
in the study of human genetics. Prog. Med. Genet. 1, 1-48.
Green, M. R., Maniatis, T., and Melton, D. A. (1983). Human ~-globin
pre-mRNA synthesized in vitro is accurately spliced in Xenopus oocyte
nuclei. Cell 32, 681-684.
Habib, R., Loirat, C., Gubler, M. C., Niaudet, P., Bensman, A., Levy,
M., and Broyer, M. (1985). The nephropathy associated with male
pseudohermaphroditism and Wilms' tumor (Drash syndrome): a distinctive glomerular lesion--report of 10 cases. Clin. Neph. 24, 269278.
Haber, D. A., Buckler, A. J., Glaser, T., Call, K. M., Pelletier, J., Sohn,
R. L., Douglass, E. C., and Housman, D. E. (1990). An internal deletion
within an 11p13 zinc finger gene contributes to the development of
Wilms' tumor. Cell 61, 1257-1269.
Haber, D. A., Sohn, R., Buckler, A. R., Pelletier, J., Call, K., and Housman, D. E. (1991). Alternative splicing and genomic structure of the
Wilms' tumor gene, WT1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, in press.
Huff, V., Miwa, H., Haber, D. A., Call, K. M., Housman, D., Strong,
L. C., and Saunders, G. F. (1991). Evidence for WT1 as a Wilms' tumor
(WT) gene: intragenic germinal deletion in bilateral WT. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 48, 997-1003.

Germline Mutations in WT1 in Denys-Drash Syndrome
447

Jadresic, L., Wadey, R. B., Buckle, B., Barratt, T. M., Mitchell, C. D.,
and Cowell, J. K. (1991). Molecular analysis of chromosome region
11p13 in patients with Drash syndrome. Hum. Genet. 86, 497-501.
J&ger, R. J., Anvret, M., Hall, K., and Scherer, G. (1990). A human XY
female with a frame shift mutation in the candidate testis-determining
gene SRY. Nature 348, 452-454.
Kadonaga, J. T., Carner, K. R., Masiarz, F. R., and Tjian, R. (1987).
Isolation of cDNA encoding transcription factor Spl and functional
analysis of the DNA binding domain. Cell 51, 1079-1090.
Knudson, A. G., Jr., and Strong, L. C. (1972). Mutation and cancer: a
model for Wilms' tumor of the kidney. J. Natl. Canc. Inst. 48, 313-324.
Langridge, J., Langridge, P., and Bergquist, P. L. (1980). Extraction of
nucleic acids from agarose gels. Anal. Biochem. 103, 264-271.
Lewis, W. H., Yeger, H., Bonetta, L., Chan, H. S. L., Kang, J., Junien,
C., Cowell, J., Jones, C. A., and Defoe, L. A. (1988), Homozygous
deletion of a DNA marker from chromosome 11 p13 in sporadic Wilms'
tumor. Genomics 3, 25-31.
Malkin, D., Li, F. P., Strong, L C., Fraumeni, J. F., Jr., Nelson, C. E.,
Kim, D. H., Kassel, J., Gryka, M. A, Bischoff, F. Z., Tainsky, M. A., and
Friend, S. H. (1990). Germ-line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome
of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. Nature 250, 12331238.
Matsunaga, E. (1981). Genetics of Wilms' tumor. Hum. Genet. 57, 231246.
Miller, R. W., Fraumeni, J. F., Jr., and Manning, M. D. (1964). Association of Wilms' tumor with aniridia, hemihypertrophy and other congenital malformations. New Engl. J. Med. 270, 922-927.
Munroe, D., and Jacobson, A. (1990). mRNA poly(A) tail, a 3' enhancer
of translational initiation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 3441-3455.
Orita, M., Iwahana, H., Kanazawa, H., Hayashi, K., and Sekiya, T.
(1989). Detection of polymorphisms of human DNA by gel electrophoresis as single-strand conformation polymorphisms. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 86, 2766-2770.
Pavletich, N. P., and Paboi C. O. (1991). Zinc fin~ler-DNA recognition:
crystal structure of a Zif268-DNA complex at 2.1 A. Science 252, 809817.
Pelletier, J., Sruening, W., Li., F. P., Haber, D. A., Glaser, T., and
Housman, D. (1991a). WT1 mutations contribute to abnormal genital
system development and hereditary Wilms' tumor. Nature, in press.
Pelletier, J., Munroe, D., and Housman, D. (1991b). Molecular genetics
of Wilms' tumor. In Molecular Basis of Human Diseases (Cold Spring
Harbor, New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory), in press.
Pelletier, J., Schalling, M., Buckler, A. J., Rogers, A., Haber, D. A.,
and Housman, D. (1991c). Expression of the Wilms' tumor gene WII
in the murine urogenital system. Genes Dev. 5, 1345-1356.
Pritchard-Jones, K., Fleming, S., Davidson, D., Bickmore, W., Porteous, D., Gosden, C., Bard, J., Buckler, A., Pelletier, J., Housman,
D., van Heyningen, V., and Hastie, N. (1990). The candidate Wilms'
tumor gene is involved in genitourinary development. Nature 346,194197.
Rauscher, F. J., Ill, Morris, J. F., Tournay, O. E., Cook, D. M., and
Curran, T. (1990). Binding of the Wilms' tumor locus zinc finger protein
to the EGR-1 consensus sequence. Science 250, 1259-1262.
Reeve, A. E., Shih, S. A., Raizis, A. M., and Feinberg, A. P. (1989).
Loss of allelic heterozygosity at a second locus on chromosome 11 in
sporadic Wilms' tumor cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 9, 1799-1803.
Riccardi, V. M., Sujansky, E., Smith, A. C., and Francke, U. (1978).
Chromosomal imb~.lance in the aniridia-Wilms' tumor association: 1l p
interstitial deletion. Pediatrics 61,604-610.
Royer-Pokora, B., Ragg, S., Heckl-Ostreioher, B., Held, M., Loos, U.,
Call, K., Glaser, T., Housman, D., Saunders, G., Zabel, B., Williams,
B., and Poustka, A. (1991). Direct pulsed field gel electrophoresis of
Wilms' tumors shows that DNA deletions in 1lp13 are rare. Genes,
Chromosomes, Cancer 3, 89-100.
"Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual (Cold Spring Harbor, New York: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory).
Sanger, A. F., Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. R. (1977). DNA sequencing

with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 54635467.
Schroeder, W. T., Chao, L.-Y., Dao, D. D., Strong, L. C., Pathak,
S., Riccardi, V., Lewis, W. H., and Saunders, G. F. (1987). Nonrandom
loss of maternal chromosome 11 alleles in Wilms' tumors. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 40, 413-420.
Srivastava, S., Zou, Z., Pirollo, K., Blattner, W., and Chang, E. H.
(1990). Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancerprone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Nature 348, 747-749.
Ton, C. C. T., Huff, V., Call, K. M., Cohn, S., Strong, L. C., Housman,
D. E., and Saunders, G. F. (1991). Smallest region of overlap in Wilms'
tumor deletions uniquely implicates an 11 p13 zinc finger gene as the
disease locus. Genomics 10, 293-297.
Vortkamp, A., Gessler, M., and Grezschik, K.-H. (1991). GL13 zincfinger gene interrupted by translocations in Greig syndrome families.
Nature 352, 539-540.
Wright, D. K., and Manos, M. M. (1990). Sample preparation from
paraffin-embedded tissues. In PCR Protocols: A Guide to Methods and
Applications, M. A. Innis, D. H. Gelfand, J. J. Sninsky, and T. J. White,
eds. (New York: Academic Press), pp. 163-158.
Young, J. L., Jr., and Miller, R. W. (1975). Incidence of malignant
tumors in U. S. children. J. Ped. 86, 254-258.
Zunin, C., and Soave, F. (1964). Association of nephrotic syndrome
and nephroblastoma in siblings. Ann. Paediatr. 203, 29-31.

