BRIEF C L I N I C A L A N D
LABORATORY OBSERVATIONS

Articles in this section should require 3 Journal pages or less; the text 1,000 words or less. A
combined total of 2 illustrations or tables with up to 10 references will be accepted. An abstract is not
necessary.

A rgininemia treated from birth
Selma E. Snyderman, M.D.,* Claude Sansaricq, M.D., Patrieia M. Norton, A.B., and
Fred Goldstein, Ph.D., New York, N. Y.

A R G I N I N E M I A is a rare disturbance of amino acid
metabolism, the result of arginase deficiency. This
enzyme hydrolyzes arginine to ornithine and urea, the
final step in the urea cycle. The clinical expression of the
biochemical defect h a s been quite similar in the nine
patients reported thus far. 1-4 All have had the usual
sequelae of a m m o n i a intoxication, with bouts of vomiting
followed by irritability, drowsiness, convulsions, and
coma. All were severely retarded, and there was some
indication of deterioration with time in several. A marked
degree o f spastic diplegia was c o m m o n to all. Some
cerebral atrophy was present in all patients in w h o m this
was investigated. The first successful therapy was with the
use of a diet which provided the nitrogen moiety as a
mixture of essential amino acids; the total nitrogen
content met hut did n o t exceed the nitrogen requirement
of the child? This nutritional approach reduced the
hyperargininemia, prevented the episodic hyperammonemia, reduced the hyperactivity, and resulted in a signific a n t improvement in mental capacity in two children
affected with the disease. We have suggested that it might
be possible, if this diet were initiated early enough, to
prevent all the untoward clinical features of the biochemical error. It is the purpose o f this communication to
describe our experience with a child treated from birth.
CASE REPORT
This patient, the sibling of one of the children described in our
previous publication, was the product of an uncomplicated term
From the Department of Pediatrics New York
University School of Medicine.
Supported in part by Project 317, Maternal and Child
Health Service, Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare.
*Reprint address: New York UniversitySchool of Medicine,
550 First Ave., New York, NY 10016.

0022-3476/79/070061 +03500.30/0 9 1979 The C. V. Mosby Co.

pregnancy and a normal spontaneous delivery. Apgar scores were
9 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes. Birth weight was 3.8 kg and physical
examination was completely normal. At three hours of age the
plasm a arginine level was .4.0 mg/dl (normal average 1.3) and
arginase activity was not detectable in the erythrocytes. Repeated
/tssays of erythrocyte arginase activity all revealed less than 5% of
normal activity. Red blood cell arginine level determined just
before the initiation of therapy was 4.22 mg/dl (normal 0.4). The
infant was given glucose water until the essential amino acid
mixture was started at 18 hours of age; a milk formula was never
offered. The mixture was fed in an amount to provid? the
equivalent of 2 gm of protein per kg of body weight. It was
supplemented with Mead Johnson product 80056* to furnish a
total caloric intake of 125 calories/kg. This was the only feeding
for the first four months of life. After this, fruits, low protein
vegetables and rice cereal were introduced. The diet was later
supplemented with various protein-free products such as special
bread, cookies, pasta, etc. The natural protein intake has never
exceeded 5 grams/day, which provides an estimated 250 to 300
rag/day of arginine.
See related article, p. 67.
MATERIALS

AND METHODS

Quantitative determination o f the arginine level was
performed by ion exchange column chromatography
according to the method of Piez and Morris? Erythrocyte
arginase activity was determined by a modification of the
method of Tomlinson and Westall. 6 Plasma a m m o n i a
levels were determined by the a m m o n i a specific electrode
method. 7
The amino acid mixture was prepared in our laboratory
from L-amino acids. It included the nine amino acids
known to be essential in the neonatal period, and cystine
*Kindly provided by Mead Johnson and Co. This product furnishes fat,
carbohydrate, vitamins, and minerals.

The Journal of P E D I A T R I C

S

61

62

Brief clinical and laboratory observations

The Journal of Pediatrics
July 1979

Table. Composition of the essential amino acid mixture
WEIGHT
IN
KILOGRAMS

4

PLASMA
ARGININE
MG/DL

ii
I

; ~'~!~'~i~

OI
0

2b

Amino acid

gm

L-Cystine
L-Histidine
L-Isoleucine
e-Leucine
L-Lysine
z-Methionine
c-Phenylalanine
L-Tyrosine
g-Threonine
L-Tryptophan
t-Valine

4.9
4.7
13.0
16.2
13.5
4.9
9.7
9.7
9.7
2.4
11.3

..... ;!~:~:~'~ :~:;~~!~;i; ~;'..... :;~:i!~!~J~~!~i ~ ~.i
40
AGE

6'0

80

IN

DAYS

1(30

1-~:3

Figure. The first four months of therapy. The dashed line
represents the average plasma arginine level and the stippled
area 2 SD above and below the average.
and tyrosine, which may be considered to be semiessential
at this time. The composition of this mixture is listed in
the Table.
RESULTS
The feeding was accepted readily. The plasma arginine
level fell on the second day of life and was within the
normal range by the fifth d a y of life. Plasma ammonia
levels remained within the normal limits for this age. The
protocol of this infant's first four months of therapy is
illustrated in the Figure. During this period of time it was
possible to maintain the plasma arginine level withinthe
normal range. After this, the majority of the plasma
arginine levels were between two and three times the
average normal value, except during two episodes of
upper respiratory tract infection when the levels rose to
slightly over 7 mg/dl. One of these episodes was accompanied by an elevation of the ammonia level to 180 #g/dl,
the only occasion when any degree of hyperammonemia
has been recorded. All the other plasma amino acids have
consistently been normal.
The child is presently 32 months of age and is physically, neurologically, and mentally normal. Both height
and weight are between the tenth and twenty-fifth
percentiles and repeated developmental assessments
reveal average functioning.
DISCUSSION
The results of early treatment of this infant indicate that
argininemia is another disorder of amino acid metabolism
amenable to nutritional therapy. The results in this child

are especially significant in that every late treated patient
reported thus far has had severe neurologic damage and
poor intellectual development; in addition, there has been
some indication that further deterioration occurs with the
passage of time.
The use of a mixture of essential amino acids would
seem to be the preferred therapy for argininemia since it
controls both the hyperammonemia a n d the plasma
arginine level. Both of these factors seem to be of
importance in producing the clinical manifestations of the
disease. The extreme degree of spasticity, which has not
been observed in other forms of congenital hyperammonemia, suggests some special detrimental effect of arginine accumulation. In addition, both Terheggen et al 1 and
Cederbaum et al 3 were successful in controlling the
hyperammonemia with protein restriction, but the plasma
arginine level remained elevated and there was no clinical
improvement. Other methods for controlling the arginine
level, such as the use of the Shope virus 8 to induce
arginase or a 10% blood replacement with normal erythrocytes to supply arginase," have thus far been unsuccessful.
Inhibition of renal tubular reabsorption by supplying
an excess of one of a group of amino acids sharing the
same transport system has been suggested as an alternative therapy for diseases of amino acid metabolism. For
this reason, lysine supplementation should be an effective
form of therapy, since it should interfere with tubular
reabsorption of arginine. The lysinuria observed in this
disease is a manifestation of the competition that exists
between these two amino acids for a shared transport
system in the renal tubule. One trial of lysine supplementation by Michels and Beaudet" had no effect on the
plasma arginine level. In addition, we found that a load of
lysine actually increased the plasma arginine level, both in
normal controls and in two children with this disease. This
is presumably due to inhibition of arginase activity by
lysine9; such inhibition has been demonstrated to occur

Volume 95
Number 1

Brief cfinical and laboratory observations

both in rats I~ and in a patient with lysine intolerance and
periodic a m m o n i a intoxication. '1 This effect in the argininemic patient is most likely due to inhibition of the small
amount of residual arginase activity.
The untoward effect of intercurrent infections on the
course o f this child should be emphasized. The increase in
plasma arginine level and the appearance of hyperammonemia are presumably the resull of the negative
nitrogen balance that accompanies such episodes. Thus.
argininemia is similar to all diseases of amino acid
metabolism in this respect, and there is need for special
care at such times. We have approached the problem by
reducing the nitrogen intake while maintaining the caloric
intake and insuring adequate hydration.
The ability of this infant to grow normally a n d m a i n t a i n
normal plasma arginine levels during the first four
months o f life on a diet completely devoid of arginine
demonstrates that this amino acid is not essential for the
infant. This confirms earlier studies on the normal
infant, 12 but differs from .the conclusion reached as a
result of experience with intravenous alimentation in
young infants. Since the h y p e r a m m o n e m i a that was
sporadically seen in intravenously nourished infants did
respond to increased administration of arginine, a
requirement for this amino acid was postulated. This
h y p e r a m m o n e m i a was probably the result of an overload
of total nitrogen with an unbalanced mixture of amino
acids, rather than a manifestation of simple arginine
deficiency. Such an excess maY increase the requirement
to levels which cannot be synthesized by the immature
'infant. However, aside from this special circumstance,
arginine can apparently be synthesized in adequate

63

amounts to take care of all of the usual needs of the
infant.

REFERENCES
1. I'erheggen HG. Lowenthal A. Lavinha F. and Colombo JP:
Familial hyperarginmaemia, Arch Dis Child 50:57, 1975.
2. Snyderman SE. Sansaricq C. Chert WJ. Norton PM, and
Phansalkar SV! Argininemia. J PEDIATR90:563, 1977.
3. Cederbaum SD. Shaw KNF. and Valente M: Hyperargininemia. J PEDIATR90:569. 1977.
4. Michels VV. and Beaudet AL: Arginase deficiency in
multiple tissues in argininemia. Clin CJenet 13:61. 1978.
5. Piez KS_ and Morris L: A modified procedure for the
automatic analyses of amino acids. Anal Biochem 1:187,
1960.
6. Tomlinson S, and Westall RG: Arginmosuccinic aciduria.
Argiriinosuccinase and arginase m human blood cells, Clin
Sci 26:261, 1964.
7. Anili AF. Autizi D. and Capocaccia L: Rapid determination of plasma ammonia using an ion specific electrode,
Biochem Med.14:109, 1975.
8. Terheggen HG, Lowenthal A, Lavinha F, Colombo JP, and
Rogers S: Unsuccessful trial of gene replacement in arginase deficiency, Z Kinderheilkd 119:1, 1975.
9. Cittadini D, Pietropaolo C, DeCristoford D, and D'AyjelloCaracciola A! In vivo effect of L-lysine on rat liver arginase,
Nature 203:643, 1964.
10. Statler M, and Russell A: Competitive interrelationships
between lysine and arginine in rat liver under normal
conditions arid in experimental hyperammonemia, Life Sci
22:2097, 1978.
11. Colombo JP, Burgi W, Richterich R, and Rossi E: Congenital lysine intolerance with periodic ammonia intoxication:
a defect in L-lysine degradation, Metabolism 16:910, 1967.
12. Snyderman SE, Boyer A, and Holt LE Jr: The arginine
requirement of the infant, Am J Dis Child 97:192, 1959.

Diagnosis of Rocky Mountain spotted fever by

immunofluorescent identification of Rickettsia

rickettsii

in skin biopsy tissue
Gary Fieisher, M.D.,* Evelyne T. Lennette, Ph.D., and Paul Honig, M.D., Philadelphia, Pa.
ROCKY M O U N T A I N SPOTTED FEVER has been
increasing in frequency over the past five years in the
United States and continues to have a mortality rate of
7%. 1 A significant factor contributing to the mortality is
From the Department of Pediatrics and the Divisions
of Infectious Diseases and Exp'erimental Virology,.
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, and
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
*Reprint address: The Children"s Hospital of' Philadelphia,
34th & Civic Center Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

0022-3476/79/070063 +03500.30/0 9 1979 The C. V. Mosby Co.

the inability to rapidly confirm a diagnosis and initiate
appropriate therapy. 2 Since serologic techniques rely on
the detection of a rise in antibodies, which appea r only
Abbreviation used
RMSF: Rocky Mountain spotted fever
late in the course of the illness, 3 a specific direct immunofluorescent-staining technique has been introduced to
identify Rickettsia rickettsii in tissue obtained by skin

