The values of Vmax and Km for the three genetic variants A, B, and A- of erythrocyte glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase have been determined at 10 different pH values in the range from 5.5 to 9.5, and at four different temperatures in the range from 18.5-40.0 degrees. The log Vmax versus pH curve for each of the enzymes shows a monotonic increase between pH 5.5 and 7, and a plateau from pH 7.5 upwards. These curves, and their temperature dependence, are compatible with the presence of a single ionizable group which, in its conjugate acid form, renders the enzyme-substrate complex inactive. The pK of this group is 6.94 at 18.5 degrees, and its enthalpy of ionization is 7.0 kcal mol-1. The log Km versus pH curves show a broad plateau between pH 6.2 and 8.2, interrupted by a sharp minimum at pH 7.2 for variant B, while variants A and A- show sharp maxima at pH 7.2 and 7.45, respectively. It is proposed that this unusual behavior depends on the dissociation of the tetrameric enzyme to dimers in this pH region. Specifically, it is shown that  a sharp maximum or minimum of Km can arise if cooperative uptake or release of protons is linked to dimer formation, and if the degree of cooperativity is different for the free enzyme compared to the enzyme-substrate complex. The pH dependence of the equilibrium between the tetrameric and the dimeric form of the enzyme has been determined by gel filtration for the same three genetic variants B, A, and A-. In agreement with previous ultracentrifugal data, the enzyme is a tetramer in acid solution and a dimer in alkaline solution. The pH at which half of the enzyme is in dimeric form, under our experimental conditions, is 7.15 +/- 0.05 for variants A and B, and 7.35 +/- 0.05 for variant A-. These pH values correspond closely, for all three variants, to the sharp extrema in the pH dependence of their Km values for glucose 6-phosphate. From the measured dissociation equilibria, it can be inferred that the tetramer-dimer transition entails cooperative release of protons. The degree of cooperativity estimated from these data agrees closely with the independent estimate based on the pH dependence of Km.