Cell, Vol. 62, 999-1006,

September7, 1990,Copyright0 1990by Cell Press

A Molecular Basis for Familial Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy: A p Cardiac Myosin Heavy Chain
Gene Missense Mutation
An/a A. T. Geisterfer-Lowrance,’
Susan Kass,t
Gary Tanigawa,t Hans-Peter W&erg,*
William McKenna,§ Christine E. Seidman,
and J. G. Seldmant
Cardiovascular Division
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
t Howard Hughes Medical Institute
and Department of Genetics
Harvard Medical School
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
*Department of Cell Physiology
Max-Planck Institute for Medical Research
Heidelberg
Federal Republic of Germany
5 Department of Cardiological Sciences
St. George’s Hospital Medical School
London
England
l

A point mutation in exon 13 of the 3 cardiac myosin
heavy chain (MHC) gene is present in all individuals
affected with familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
(FHC) from a large kindred. This missense mutation
converts a highly conserved arginine residue (Arg403) to a glutamine. Affected individuals from an unrelated family lack this missense mutation, but instead
have an a/j3 cardiac MHC hybrid gene. Identification of
two unique mutations within cardiac MHC genes in all
individuals
with FHC from two unrelated families
demonstrates that defects in the cardiac MHC genes
can cause this disease. The pathology resulting from
a missense mutation at residue 403 further suggests
that a critical function of myosin is disrupted by this
mutation.

Identification of the genetic defect responsible for a disease such as familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC)
has proven to be a difficult task. There are approximately
1200 human diseases that, like FHC, are inherited as an
autosomal dominant trait. The molecular basis of less
than 60 of these has been established (McKusick, 1966).
One approach to elucidating the molecular etiology of an
autosomal dominant disease has been to identify a candidate gene, often suggested by linkage analyses, and then
to demonstrate that the protein encoded by this gene has
an altered function in affected individuals. Application of
this approach to FHC is difficult because the affected tissue (cardiac muscle) is not readily available for analysis
and because specific biochemical assays for many functions of the candidate protein (myosin heavy chain) do not
exist.

We have previously demonstrated that a gene responsible for FHC is linked to the a and p cardiac myosin heavy
chain (MHC) genes (Solomon et al., 1990a). These genes
are excellent candidates for causing this disorder because they are expressed in the heart, the principal organ
that exhibits pathology in FHC. Furthermore, in animal
models of cardiac hypertrophy, expression of the a and 6
cardiac MHC genes is altered (Izumo et al., 1987). While
similar analyses of the expression of the a and 9 cardiac
MHC genes in humans with FHC have not confirmed
these findings, such studies have been limited to immunohistochemical techniques (Mercadier et al., 1983; Hirzel et
al., 1985). Recently, the human f3 cardiac MHC gene has
been cloned and the complete nucleotide sequence determined (Liew et al., 1990; Jaenicke et al., 1990). Less is
known about the human a cardiac MHC gene, which has
been only partially cloned and characterized (Kurabayashi et al., 1988; YamauchirTakihara et al., 1989).
Another approach to elucidating whether a candidate
gene causes a particular disorder is to demonstrate that
unrelated and affected individuals have mutations in the
same candidate gene. We have recently demonstrated
that individuals with FHC from one family bear a mutation
in their cardiac MHC genes (Tanigawa et al., 1990 [accompanying article]) that produces an a/f3 cardiac MHC hybrid
gene. These data suggested that mutations in the cardiac
MHC genes cause FHC, but could not definitively exclude
the possibility that the MHC mutation was closely linked
to a gene that was principally responsible for the disease.
To demonstrate conclusively that mutations in the cardiac
MHC genes cause FHC, we sought to identify cardiac
MHC gene defects in affected individuals from other, unrelated families.
FHC is a genetically heterogeneous disorder (Solomon
et al., 1990b). A locus responsible for this disease, on
chromosome 14 band qll-12, is designated #/C-I. The
first step in our analyses involved identifying a family in
which the disease is caused by a mutation in the FHC-1
locus. The gene responsible for FHC in a large French
Canadian kindred (Figure lA, family A) is located at FHC-7,
closely linked to the cardiac MHC genes (Jarcho et al.,
1989; Solomon et al., 1990a). We have designated the affected allele in this family FHC-la. The second step in our
analyses involved characterizing the a and 6 cardiac MHC
genes of the FHC-la allele to determine if they contained
a mutation that should alter a cardiac MHC polypeptide.
We now report that affected individuals from family A have
a missense mutation in their f3 cardiac MHC gene. This
point mutation replaces a highly conserved arginine residue with a glutamine residue. This finding represents the
identification of a second, independent mutation within
the cardiac MHC genes of affected individuals with FHC.
Since mutations in the cardiac MHC genes are present in
two unrelated families with this disease, we conclude that
mutations in the cardiac MHC genes cause FHC in some
families. Furthermore, because the missense mutation
present in family A alters an amino acid that has been

Cdl
1000

highly conserved throughout evolution, we speculate that
this mutation affects a critical function of the MHC molecule.
Results
The a and p cardiac MHC genes are only 4.5 kb apart
(Saez et al., 1987; Matsuoka et al., 1989). Each gene consists of 40 exons and encompasses approximately 30 kb
of DNA. A simple and rapid method for identifying mutations within a large gene(s), like the cardiac MHC genes,
has not been devised. One could determine the nucleotide sequence of the putative mutated gene and compare
this to the nucleotide sequence of the normal gene. The
entire nucleotide sequence of the human p cardiac MHC
gene has been determined (Liew et al., 1990; Jaenicke et
al., 1990), but comparable data on the a cardiac MHC
gene are currently unavailable. This direct approach
would therefore require nucleotide sequence analysis of
30 kb of genomic DNA from a normal a cardiac MHC gene
and 80 kb of DNA containing the a and p cardiac MHC
genes from an affected individual. If, however, a mutation
altered a restriction enzyme recognition site, one could
identify this by Southern blot analyses of DNA from affected individuals. Given the size of the cardiac MHC
genes, we elected to begin our analyses with the latter approach.
To determine if the cardiac MHC genes of affected individuals in family A contained a mutation similar to that detected in affected individuals of family B (Tanigawa et al.,
1990), the restriction enzyme maps of the a and p cardiac
MHC genes from affected and unaffected individuals
were compared (see Figure 2). Southern blot analyses
were performed with several restriction enzymes that
recognize 8 bp sites. These blots were hybridized to
probes derived from the a and p cardiac MHC genes (see
Figure 2). All restriction fragments identified in the DNAs
of affected individuals were identical in size to those found
in the DNAof unaffected family members, suggesting that
the cardiac MHC genes in the #K-la allele were not
grossly altered.
To study the structure of the cardiac MHC genes of affected individuals at higher resolution, these genes were
cloned and characterized by fine-structure restriction enzyme site mapping and nucleotide sequence analysis.
DNA fragments derived from the a and p cardiac MHC
genes of affected individual II-1 (Figure 1A) were cloned
into bacteriophage h (Experimental Procedures). Because the a and p cardiac MHC genes are highly homologous to each other and to the other MHC genes, we did
not attempt to clone these genes directly from a genomic
bacteriophage library. Rather, we first identified restriction
fragments in Southern blots that were specifically derived
from either the a or p cardiac MHC genes, using DNA
probes that recognized particular portions of these genes.
Isolated fragments (Figure 2, fragments BB-17, 0X-15, PB12, aH-17, aE-15, aH-7) were then cloned into bacteriophage vectors.
To be certain that both alleles containing the cardiac
MHC genes had been cloned, multiple independently iso-

lated clones containing each a or B cardiac MHC fragment
were obtained. These were analyzed for unique restriction
fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs). Individual II-1
has been shown previously to be heterozygous for a
BamHl RFLP detected by probe PE-4.3 (Solomon et al.,
1990a). This and newly identified polymorphisms (our unpublished data) found in the cardiac MHC genes were
used to distinguish clones that were derived from the
MHC genes of the normal allele and the FHC-la allele of
affected individual 11-l. The identification of two clones
containing the same restriction fragment from either the
a or the p cardiac MHC gene, but which were polymorphic at one of these sites, provided evidence that each
clone represented one of the two alleles present in individual 11-1.Bacteriophage clones derived from each allele spanned 20 kb of the p cardiac MHC gene and 28 kb
of the a cardiac MHC gene. No polymorphisms were identified in clones aH-7 that could discriminate between alleles.
One clone representing each allele was then selected
for detailed characterization by digestion with 20 restriction enzymes. The orientation of each allelic clone with respect to vector sequences was identical. In the 20 kb of
cloned sequences derived from the p cardiac MHC gene
and the 26 kb of cloned sequences derived from the a
cardiac MHC gene, six different RFLPs were detected between clones derived from the two alleles found in individual II-1 (Figure 2, arrows). To ascertain if any of these
six polymorphisms could represent the mutation causing
FHC in family A, several analyses were performed. We determined if any of these polymorphisms segregated with
the disease by Southern blot analyses of genomic DNA
from selected family members. Candidate polymorphisms
were then characterized by nucleotide sequence analysis
to determine if a mutation that yielded a polymorphism
also altered encoded protein sequences. DNAs from unrelated individuals were then screened to determine the
frequency of identified polymorphisms in the general
population.
Previous analyses have demonstrated that the BamHl
polymorphism present in the p cardiac MHC gene
segregates with FHC in family A (Solomon et al., 1990a).
However, since this RFLP is also present in families without FHC, it cannot be a mutation responsible for the disease. An EcoRl polymorphism was identified in the region
separating the a and p cardiac MHC genes but was present in only three individuals in family A and did not segregate with the disease. Four polymorphic differences were
detected between a cardiac MHC gene segments derived
from each allele of individual II-l. Two of these, a Hhal and
an Alul polymorphism, are present in intron 1 of the a
cardiac MHC gene (data not shown). The Hhal polymorphism identified in the clones derived from the FHC-la allele of individual II-1 is also present in unaffected individuals. A Ddel polymorphism and a polymorphism resulting
from a difference in the length of avariable nucleotide tandem repeat (Figure 2, TR) were also identified in intron sequences of the a cardiac MHC gene (data not shown).
Since four of these newly identified polymorphisms are located within intron sequences and are unlikely to alter the

A 5 Cardiac MHC Missense Mutation Causes FHC
1001

A

B

W

II-12 II-34

III-9 III-10

Figure 1. Inheritance of FHC and the 5D-,425 Polymorphism in
Family A
(A) The pedigree of family A is presented using standard nomenclature. Males (squares) and females (circles) are identified by generation
and subject number. The disease status of each individual is indicated
by shading: closed symbols, affected; open symbols, unaffected. Deceased individuals are represented by a slash. The genotype of each
individual is shown. Allele 1 indicates a 425 bp fragment, and allele
2 represents a 395 bp fragment identified by 5D-,425.
(6) Southern blot of Ddel-digested DNAs from members of a small nuclear family from family A (dashed box in IA]) hybridized to the 5D-,425
probe (see Experimental Procedures).

III-1 1 III-12

439
395

300

gene products encoded by the a cardiac MHC gene, and
because the EcoRl polymorphism present in the 8 cardiac
MHC gene did not cosegregate with FHC in affected family members, we concluded that these polymorphic sites
did not result from a mutation that also caused FHC in affected members of family A.
A sixth polymorphic difference was observed after Ddel
digestion of the two allelic clones encoding the 17 kb
BamHl fragment of the 5 cardiac MHC gene. These
clones extend from a BamHl site located 10 kb 5’ of the
5 cardiac MHC gene through exon 15 (Figure 2, 56-17).
Digestion of these clones with Ddel yielded approximately
30 DNA restriction fragments. All but one Ddel fragment
derived from the two allelic clones comigrated. A 425 bp
Ddel fragment was produced from the Be-17 clone derived
from the unaffected allele, while a 385 bp fragment was
obtained from the FHCl* allele.
The genetic linkage relationship between the WC-7 locus and the Ddel polymporphism was determined in family A. The 425 bp Ddel fragment was isolated from the 5B17 clone derived from the unaffected allele and subcloned

a

into a plasmid designated f3D-,425. This probe was hybridized to Southern blots of Ddel-digested DNA from all
members of family A. Probe PD-.425 detects a constant
band of 300 bp in Ddel digests of DNA from all individuals
(Figure 1B). This probably corresponds to an a cardiac
MHC gene fragment, since Ddel digestion of the corresponding cloned region of the a cardiac MHC gene
yielded a fragment of similar size after hybridization to pD.425 (data not shown). Two polymorphic fragments, 425
bp (allele 1) and 385 bp band (allele 2), were also identified
in DNA digested with Ddel from members of family A (Figure 1B). These restriction fragments are inherited in a
Mendelian fashion; the 385 bp DNA fragment found in individual II-12 was inherited by three of four children.
Figure 1A shows the genotype of all individuals in family
A. Allele 2 was observed only in digests of DNA obtained
from affected family members. Among members of family
A there was a perfect correlation between inheritance of
allele 2 and inheritance of FHC. Assuming a disease
penetrance for FHC of 0.95 (Clark et al., 1973), the maximum LOD (logarithm of the odds) score for coinheritance

Figure 2. Restriction Map of the a and f3
Cardiac MHC Genes lndiceting the Locations
of Polymorphic Restrtction Sttes, Exons 13,
H E”
B
Four DNA Probes Used in These Studies, and
the DNA Fragments Cloned from an Affected
3’
I
Family A Individual
EX13
I313
L--L
aHBg-3
pE-4.3
Locations of selected restriction enzyme sites
PC.3 PD.%5
5 Kb
are shown (6, SamHI; X, Xhol; H, Hindlll; E,
aH-17
di-7-----px-1s
EcoRI; Sg, Bglll). Potyrnorphic sites am indioE-15
pe-I2
cated by arrows. TR represents a tandom nucleotide repeat. Probes (f3H-1.3,5D-.425, 5E-4.3, and aHSg-3) and clones (BE17, 5X-15, 5512, aH-17, aH-7, and aE-15) am identtfted as either a or
f3cardiac MHC gene, the subsequent letter(s) indicating restriction enzyme, the number indicating size in kilobases. The location of exon 13 in each
of the a and 5 cardiac MHC genes is indicated. (Note: only those restriction enzyme sites relevant to this study am shown. Not all sites identified
by a particular restriction enzyme am indicated.)

P

c&l TR
H
E

Cdl

1002

AFFECTED
GATCGATC

B

Unaffected
Attected

NORMAL

a.

Figure 3. Nucleotide and Predicted Amino Acid Sequences of the
Normal Allele and the WC-la Allele in the Region Encoding the Ddel
Polymorphism
(A) DNA sequencing gel demonstrating the difference between an affected and normal individuals’ exon 13. (B) Nucleotide sequence and
predicted protein sequence encoded by exon 13 of the 3 cardiac MHC
gene from the normal and FIfrX* allele of an affected individual. DNA
sequences were determined from plasmid clones containing the 17 kb
BamHl fragment from the 5’ end of the 3 cardiac MHC gene (Figure
2 and Experimental Procedures). The nucleotide sequence of the normal allele is given to the right of the sequencing gel. The missense
mutation detected in the affected allele (arrow) converts a G to an A.
The predicted amino acid sequence encoded by exon 13 is presented
in the three-letter code.

luRloRspLysSerAlaTyrLeu~etGlyLeuRsnSerRlaRspLeuLeuLysGlyLeuCys
TCCRGRGGCTGRCRRGTCTGCCTRCCTCRTGGGGCTGRRCTCRGCCGRCCTGCTCflRGGGGCTGTGC
,D,S4
.I......,.I.,.....I.I.I..,......II
,...,....,..,I
I.II**.**II*..*....

Unaffr.&ed

HisProRrgUalLysUalGlyAsnGluTyrUolThrLysGlyGlnRsnUalGlnGln
CRCCCTCGGGTGRRRGTGGGCRRTGRGTRCGTCACCRRGGGGCRGflRTGTCCRGCRGGTGGGTCCRT
10221

Affected

. . . . . ..R...........................................................
Gln

of allele 2 and FHC in this family was 15.9 (8 = 0). (The
frequencies of alleles 1 and 2 used for these calculations

were 0.98 and 0.02, respectively, although the data presented below suggest that the frequency of allele 2 is less
than 0.005.) These data demonstrate that the probability
that the polymorphic Ddel site is not linked to the FHC-7
locus is less than 1 in 1015.
While these dataconfirmed that the cardiac MHC genes
are genetically linked to the FHC-7 locus, they do not
differentiate between a polymorphism linked to the disease locus and a disease-causing mutation. To clarify this
relationship, we performed Southern blot analyses using
DNA from unaffected and unrelated individuals. If the mutation that produced allele 2 of the Ddel polymorphism
also caused FHC, this polymorphism should not be present in unaffected individuals. Southern blot analyses failed
to detect the 385 bp fragment (allele 2) in Ddel digests of
the DNA from 104 individuals (data not shown). These data
suggest that the frequency of allele 2 is less than 0.005
(<l/208) in the normal population. We concluded that the
385 bp fragment present in Ddel digests from affected individuals cosegregates exclusively with the F/-/C-P allele.
To ascertain whether the mutation responsible for the
Ddel polymorphism affects the expression or function of
the 5 cardiac MHC polypeptide, we determined the
nucleotide sequences of the normal allele and the FHCla allele in the region encoding the Ddel polymorphism.
Restriction enzyme mapping suggested that clone pD.425 was derived from exon 13 of the 5 cardiac MHC gene
(data not shown). We determined the nucleotide sequences of axon 13 of clones 56-17 derived from the normal and FHC-la alleles. These were identical except for a
single nucleotide change (Figure 3). A guanine residue
present in the clone derived from the unaffected allele at
position 10,182 (enumerated as in Jaenicke et al., 1990) is
mutated to an adenine residue in the clone derived from

the F/G-la allele. The nucleotide sequence of the 5
cardiac MHC gene has been previously determined by
two independent laboratories (Liew et al., 1990; Jaenicke
et al., 1990), and both document a guanine residue at position 10,182. The identified mutation generates a new
Ddel site and thus accounts for the Ddel polymorphism
found in the F/G-la allele. The observed nucleotide substitution in the FHC-la allele also changes arginine residue 403, encoded by a CGG codon, to a glutamine residue encoded by a CAG codon. The resultant Gln residue
should significantly alter the structure of the 5 cardiac
MHC polypeptide in this region because this amino acid
substitution is accompanied by a change in charge from
+l to 0.
Dlscuaelon
We have demonstrated that a unique mutation exists in
the cardiac MHC genes of individuals with FHC from a
large kindred. A missense mutation present in exon 13 of
the f3 cardiac MHC gene of affected members in family A
converts an arginine residue to a glutamine residue. To assess the importance of a particular amino acid residue in
the function of a polypeptide, one can determine if that
residue is conserved through evolution. The amino acid
sequences of 15 different MHC polypeptides have been
determined from a variety of species. Figure 4 illustrates
the amino acid sequence of exon 13 from these 15 different myosin polypeptides. Arginine residue 403 is contained in a region of six highly conserved amino acids,
402-408 (PRVKVG), and is one of five amino acids that
is invariant in all 15 sequences of exon 13. The largest
evolutionary distance between the characterized MHC
polypeptides (Figure 4) is the distance between man and
amoeba (Acanthamoeba castellanii); this divergence is
thought to have occurred at least 800 million year3 ago

A$$ardiac

MHC Missense Mutation Causes FHC

Figure 4. Comparison of Amino Acid Sequences Encoded by Exon 13 of the Human 5
Cardiac MHC Gene and 15 Other MHC Polycardiac p (human) EADKSAYLNGLNSADLLKGLCH
peptides from a Number of Different Species
cardiac 5 (rat) ..,.,...,,...,....,,..
Amino acid sequences were deduced from
cardiaca(rat)D....................
nucleotide sequences of myosin genes (except
embryonic skeletal muscle (human) U . T I T , I . * I I s
rabbit skeletal muscle myosin, for which oriembryonic skeletal muscle (rat) U , , , T , , , , fl.S....fl..F
,.*,,1,.,,,...
T.D.
mary amino acid sequence data were availskeletal muscle (rabbit) U , , I R , . , QT .T.....R.KY
able) and are indicated in single-letter code
D.,,
,*,,,..**,.,
(see Figure 3 for three-fetter code of each resiembryonic (chicken)
U , , , A , . , , * . . . . . ..A..Y ..I.,.........
T ,..
due). Residues identical to the human 5
smooth muscle (chicken) A, Q , IJCA. , .UT.FTRSILT., I , . .RDU. Q.R.TKE.
cardiac MHC gene are represented by dots;
nOnmuSCle
(chlcken)
A, Q , USH , L , .UT.FTR. ILT., I . . *RD.. Q.R.TKE.
differences are shown in single-letter code.
C. elesans unc54 . E I RSNNY, GCEEF..R.TK., ,...T.U.S,..NCE.
Areas of sequence highly conserved between
species (amino acids 4D2-498) are boxed. The
C. elegans myla
I ERACNW , DUUQF..R.US. . . . ..T.U.S...N.D.
missense mutation (glutamine 10) for arginine
C. elegans my2a D. ERA, KCF. ID.EEF..R.TR . ,I. . . . . U.N...KIE.
[FI]) in exon 13 of the D cardiac MHC gene from
C. elegans my3a D. LNfl I RNLI IQREEF..R.TK, ..,..T.U.N...NLE.
the FHCP allele is shown. Sources for seD. melanogaster , GGRuSK. F CDT.E.Y.N.LK.. I.. . .F, TQ.RN.. ,
quence data: human 5 cardiac MHC, Jaenicke
A.castellanii .LNIR.E.L.usR.G.KR..Ls, uun.I. . ..u. u ,RRLNKPK
et al. (ISSO), Liew et al. (1999); rat a and rat p
cardiac MHC, McNallyet al. (1989); human embryonic MHC, Stedman et al. (199D);rat embryonic MHC, Strehler et al. (1989); rabbit MHC, Tongand Elzinga(l99D); chicken embryonic MHC, Mofina
et al. (1987); chicken smooth muscle MHC, Yanagisawa et al. (1987); chicken nonmuscle MHC, Shohet al. (1989); C. efegans unc54, Karn et al. (1983);
C. efegans myla, my2a, and my3a, Dibb et al. (1989); D. mefanogaster MHC, Rozek and Davidson (1988); A. castellanii MHC, Jung et al. (1989).
Ftlc-1

a

I. *I , , I. ,I II,. ,. , ,. I p , I

I ,, I ,,

(Darn&l et al., 1986). The finding that the missense mutation in a coding portion of the 9 cardiac MHC gene alters
an arginine residue that has been conserved for over 600
million years provides further evidence that the mutation
defined by the Ddel polymorphism is responsible for FHC
in affected members of family A.
The MHC polypeptide\Figure 5) has two functional domains (reviewed in Harrington and Rodgers, 1994): a globular head region (Sl) and an elongated rod region (S2 and
LMM). The head region contains the ATPase activity of the
molecule and the subregions that bind to myosin light
chains and actin polypeptides. The head region appear8
to be critical for structural transitions of the actin-myosin
Complex that are coupled to release of inorganic phosphate from ATP The missense mutation identified in exon
13 of the 3 cardiac MHC gene from individual8 with FHC

Globular
e
L
1

2

23K

3 4 56

4

ATG

789

1011

Rod
/s2
i

12 13,415

161718

AcGn

ATP

would alter the amino acid structure of the globular head
region of the myosin molecule. The mutationally altered
residue is not one previously associated with specific ATPase function or actin binding. However, because this mutation occurs in a sequence that is highly conserved in
evolutionarily distant species, we Speculate that this conserved segment of the MHC polypeptide is important for
one of these or a previously unidentified function. We anticipate that characterization of the altered MHC polypeptide resulting from this missense mutation and identification of other mutations that cause FHC will help to elucidate
novel structure-function relationship8 of the myosin molecules.
The missense mutation occur8 only in the B cardiac
MHC gene of affected individuals. Human p cardiac MHC
genes are expressed in both the heart and skeletal mus-

Head

Sl
SOK

[

,,,I

t

Exon 13: site of
point mutation

A&

24K
19202122

4

Active Thiils

I

51
2324

25

Cd

K
26

LMM
77 K

I

27 2529

30

313233

-

34353637

3839

40

1 kb

Figure 5. A Representation of a Cardiac MHC Gene Indicating Exons That Encode Regions of the MHC Polypeptide and Exon 13, Which Contains
the Missense Mutation That Causes FHC in Affected Members of Family A
Exon map adapted from Jaenicke et al. (1990). Locations of exons encoding the ATPase activity and the actin binding activity associated with the
head region of the MHC polypeptide are also indicated. Several proteolytic fragments (St, 23K, 50K, 24K, S2, 51K, LMM, and 77K) that can be
obtained by digestion of skeletal myosin heavy chain polypeptides are indicated. The hinge region located within the rod regions of the polypeptide
is identified. The gene is arranged in a 5’ to 3’ orientation and is colinear with the polypeptide, which is arranged in an amino-terminal to carboxyterminal orientation.

Cdl
1004

cles, while human a cardiac MHC genes are expressed
only in cardiac tissue (Lichter et al., 1988; Saez and Leinwand, 1988). Thus, a 8 cardiac MHC gene mutation might
cause abnormalities of skeletal muscle. The predominant
pathology detected in individuals with FHC occurs in the
heart; however, recent data suggest that skeletal muscle
function is also perturbed in some, but not all, individuals
with FHC (Caforio et al., 1989). The finding that some
FHC-7 mutations occur in 8 cardiac MHC genes (like FHC73 might explain the presence of skeletal muscle dysfunction in these individuals. By contrast, some FHC-7
mutations affect a cardiac MHC gene sequences (for example, the a/p cardiac MHC hybrid gene in WC-lb;
Tanigawa et al., 1990) and individuals with such mutations should have defects in their heart muscle but not
their skeletal muscle.
MHC polypeptides interact with myosin light chains, actin, troponin, and tropomyosin molecules. The physiologic
interactions between myosin and other myofibrillar proteins have implications for other families with FHC. FHC
is a genetically heterogeneous disorder (Solomon et al.,
1990b). The FHC locus in at least two other families is not
linked to the cardiac MHC genes (Solomon et al., 1990b).
At present, the location of the disease locus in these other
families is unknown. Demonstration that mutations in the
MHC genes can cause FHC in two families suggests that
defects in the genes encoding myosin-associated peptides may also cause FHC in families whose disease is not
linked to the cardiac MHC genes.
Independent genetic events producing mutations of the
cardiac MHC genes have resulted in FHC in two families.
In family A (WC-la), a missense mutation alters a highly
conserved amino acid within the head region of the molecule. In an unrelated family B (F/%-lb), we have identified
an a/f3 cardiac MHC hybrid gene that appears to have
resulted from an unequal crossover event (Tanigawa et al.,
1990). Since the cardiac MHC gene mutations that cause
FHC have been characterized in only two families, we cannot yet predict whether most affected individuals bear either of these two alleles (indicating that there is a strong
founder effect) or whether the disease occurs principally
as a result of new mutations. There are practical implications for determining the number of unique mutations
within the cardiac MHC gene that can cause FHC. Diagnosis at present is based on clinical evaluations, particularly electrocardiography and two-dimensional echocardiography. Accurate diagnosis can be difficult, especially in
children. Development of genetic probes that determine
disease status with certainty will be difficult if multiple
unique mutations in the cardiac MHC genes cause FHC.
The mechanism by which mutations in the cardiac MHC
genes produce cardiac hypertrophy is unknown. Our
analyses suggest that different types of mutations in the
cardiac MHC genes cause similar clinical diseases. One
explanation for a common pathology produced by these
apparently dissimilar mutations may relate to the ratio of
a and 8 cardiac MHC polypeptides within cardiac cells. If
appropriate assembly of myofibrils requires a critical ratio
of a and 8 cardiac MHC peptides, then a mutation that
results in aberrant 8 cardiac MHC polypeptides could be

functionally comparable to a mutation that causes an absolute increase in a-like cardiac MHC polypeptides. Characterization of the mutant cardiac MHC polypeptides
found in cardiac muscle of affected individuals should significantly improve our understanding of the mechanism by
which defects in the cardiac MHC genes cause cardiac
hypertrophy.
An intriguing question arising from these data is how
mutations in the cardiac MHC genes produce an autosomal dominant disease. Two models can be proposed
to account for a dominant phenotype produced by mutations that alter a protein’s function. If myosin gene mutations, like mutations of the retinoblastoma gene, act in a
recessive fashion even though they are inherited as an autosomal dominant trait (Cavenee et al., 1983), then a mutation that alters the normal allele may be required for disease expression. That is, perhaps the pathologic findings
in FHC result from a second, independent mutation in the
cardiac MHC genes in myocytes that already contain a
mutant MHC gene. Such cells should be unable to produce functional myosin molecules. A difficulty with this
model is that cells which contain two mutationally altered
MHC genes lack any apparent selective advantage. An alternative explanation for the autosomal dominant phenotype might be that production of some aberrant MHC polypeptides poisons assembly of many myosin molecules.
Biochemical analyses of the myofilaments in cardiac tissues from patients with FHC should improve our understanding of the mechanisms of myofibrillar assembly and
may explain the autosomal dominant mode of inheritance
of this disease.
Unexplained myocardial hypertrophy is a major clinical
feature of FHC. However, there are many human diseases
in which secondary myocardial hypertrophy occurs. For
example, cardiac hypertrophy is associated with chronic
hypertension, valvular heart disease, and endocrine or
metabolic disorders. In some of these, histopathologic
findings of myocyte and myofibrillar disarray are present,
although quantitatively less than that seen in FHC. The
molecular mechanism for development of secondary
hypertrophy in human diseases is unknown; however, experimental animal models have demonstrated altered
cardiac MHC gene expression (Izumo et al., 1987). These
studies and the data presented here suggest that changes
in the expression of cardiac MHC genes may be etiologic
in the development of myocardial hypertrophy which occurs secondary to other diseases. Understanding the
mechanism by which mutations in the cardiac MHC genes
produce the pathology characteristic of FHC may elucidate a molecular basis for myocyte growth and development and provide new insights into how these are altered
in other human diseases.
ExPerimental Procedures
Cell Lines, DNA ExtractIon, and Southern Blot Analysis
Genomic DNA from family A individuals was obtained from lymphoblastoid cell lines as described previously (Holcombe et al., 1997;
Tanigawa et al., 1990). Southern blot analyses(Southern, 1975)were
performed as described, with the following modifications. Ddeldigested genomic DNA (30 ug) was electmphoresed in 3% Nuseive

A 6 Cardiac MHC Missense
1005

Mutation Causes FHC

(American Bioanalytical),
1% agarose gels
GeneScreen Plus (New England Nuclear).

and

transferred

to

DNA Probes fmm the Cardiac MHC Genes
Probes were isolated from the cardiac MHC genes as indicated in Fig
ure 2. Probe 6H-1.3 was isolated from the human genomic clone
gMHC-2 (Diederich et al., 1989). Probe aHBg-3 was isolated from
p81A, a gift from L. A. Leinwand (Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Yeshiva University, Bronx, NY). Probe f3D-,425 was isolated from clone
BE-17 (derived from an unaffected allele) and subcloned into the plasmid Bluescript II SK- (Stratagene). Fragments used for probes were
isolated, after digestion with the appropriate restriction enzyme(s) and
subsequent fractionation, from agarose gels by standard procedures.
Probes were radiolabeled with [a-32P]dCTP (New England Nuclear)
using the random hexamer priming method (Feinberg and Vogelstein,
1984).
Cloning Cardiac MHC Gene Fragments from Affected and
Unaffected lndlvlduals
The procedure for cloning genomic DNA restriction fragments derived
from the cardiac MHC genes from the affected or unaffected allele involved the following steps (Ausubel et al., 1989). DNA (300 pg) from
patient II-I was digested with BarnHI, EcoRI, Xhol. or Hindlll, and
fractionated on lo%-40% sucrose gradients. The fraction(s) enriched
in a particular DNA fragment was identified by Southern blot analysis
using the DNA probes indicated below. Subgenomic libraries were
made from the enriched DNA fraction after ethanol precipitation, ligation into bacteriophage cloning vectors, and in vitro packaging with
Gigapackll
Gold. Reagents for library construction
were from
Stratagene. Probe pE-4.3 was used to identify the sucrose gradient
fractions enriched for the 15 kb Xhol, 7 kb Hindlll, and 12 kb BamHl
fragments present in the DNA from affected individual II-1 and to select
clones 8X-15, aH-7, and f3B12 from the subgenomic library prepared
from each enriched fraction. Similarly, probes 8H-1.3 and aHBg-3 were
used to identify the enriched fractions used to prepare subgenomic
libraries for the selection of clones 8B-17 and aH-17, respectively.
DNA Sequencing
DNA sequence was determined from plasmid subclones of fragment
be-17 by the dideoxy chain termination reaction (Sanger et al., 1977)
using a bacteriophage T7 polymerase kit (Pharmacia) and [a-35S]
dATP (New England Nuclear). The primer for exon 13 (5’-TTACCAACTTTGCTACTlGCCTTT-3r)
was synthesized (model 3808, Applied Biosystems) according to previously determined sequence (Jaenicke et
al., 1990). University of Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group software
(Devereux et al.. 1984) was used for sequence analysis.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dr. Frederick Schoen (Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital) for supplying the cover photographs.
We are indebted to H. C. Watkins, R. M. Diaz-Ferland, L. A. Leinwand,
J. A. P Pare, and family members, without whose invaluable assistance these studies would have been impossible. This work was
supported by grants from the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada
(A. A. T. G.-L.), the Howard Hughes Medical Foundation (S. K., J. G. S.),
the British Heart Foundation (W. M.), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (H.-P V.), the National Institutes of Health (HL41474 and
HL42467 to C. E. S., HL19259 to J. G. S.), and the American Heart Association (C. E. S.).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby
marked ‘advertisement”
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734
solely to indicate this fact.
Received July 20, 1990.
References
Ausubel, F. M.. Brent, Ft., Kingston, R. E., Moore, D. D.. Seidman,
J. G., Smith, J. A., and Struhl, K. (1989). Current Protocols in Molecular Biology (New York: Greene Publishing Associates and Wiley
Interscience).

Caforio, A. L. F?, Rossi, B., Risaliti, R., Siciliano, G., Marchetti, A., Angelini, C., Crea, F., Mariani, M., and Muratoria, A. (1989). Type 1 fiber
abnormalities in skeletal muscle of patients with hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy: evidence of subclinical myogenic myopathy. J.
Am. Coil. Cardiol. 14, 1464-1473.
Cavenee, W. K., Dryja, T P., Phillips, R. A., Benedict, W. F., Godbout,
R., Gallie, B. L., Murphree, A. L., Strong, L. C., and White, R. L. (1983).
Expression of recessive alleles by chromosomal
mechanisms in
retinoblastoma. Nature 305, 779-784.
Clark, C. E.. Henry, W. L., and Epstein, S. E. (1973). Familial prevalence and genetic transmission of idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic
stenosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 289, 709-714.
Darnell, J., Lodish, H., and Baltimore, D. (1986). A reconstructive analysis of cell lineages. In Molecular Cell Biology (New York: Scientific
American Books and W. H. Freeman & Co.), pp. 1134-1141.
Devereux, J., Haeberli, P, and Smithies, 0. (1984). A comprehensive
set of sequence analysis programs for the VAX. Nucl. Acids Res. 12,
387-395.
Dibb. N. J., Maruyama, I., Krause, M., and Karn, J. (1989). Sequence
analysis of the complete Caenofhabditis e/egans myosin heavy chain
gene family. J. Mol. Biol. 205, 803-613.
Diederich, K. W., Eisele, I., Ried, T, Jaenicke. T., Lichter, P, and Vosberg, H.-P (1989). Isolation and characterization of the complete human 8-myosin heavy chain gene. Hum. Genet. 87, 214-220.
Feinberg, A. t?, and Vogelstein, 8. (1984). A technique for radiolabeling
DNA restriction endonuclease fragments to high specific activity [Addendum]. Anal. Biochem. 737, 266267.
Harrington, W. F, and Rodgers, M. E. (1984). Myosin. Annu. Rev. Biothem. 53, 35-73.
Hirzel, H. O., Tuchschmid. C. R., Schneider, J., Krayenbuehl, H. f?,
and Schaub. M. C. (1985). Relationship between myosin isoenzyme
composition,
hemodynamics,
and myocardial structure in various
forms of human cardiac hypertrophy. Circ. Res. 57, 729-740.
Holcombe, R. F, Strauss, W., Owen, F. L., Boxer, L. A., Warren, R. W.,
Conley, M. E., Ferrara, J., Leavitt, R. Y, Fauci, A. S., Taylor, B. A., and
Seidman, J. G. (1987). Relationship of the genes for Chediak-Higashi
syndrome (beige) and the T-cell receptor y chain in mouse and man.
Genomics I, 287-291.
Izumo, S., Lompre, A.-M., Matsuoka, R., Koren, G., Schwartz, K.,
Nadal-Ginard, B., and Mahdavi, V. (1987). Myosin heavy chain messenger RNA and protein isoform transitions during cardiac hypertrophy. J. Clin. Invest. 79, 970-977.
Jaenicke, T, Diederich, K. W., Haas, W., Schleich, J., Lichter, l?, and
Vosberg, H.-P (1990). The complete sequence of the human 8-myosin
heavy chain gene and an analysis of its product. Genomics 8,194-206.
Jarcho, J. A., McKenna, W., Pare, J. A. P, Solomon, S. D., Holcombe,
R. F., Dickie, S., Levi, T, Donis-Keller, H.. Seidman, J. G., and Seidman, C. E. (1989). Mapping a gene for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy to chromosome 14ql. N. Engl. J. Med. 321, 1372-1378.
Jung, G., Schmidt, C. J., and Hammer, J. A., Ill (1989). Myosin I heavychain genes of Acanthamoeba castellanii: cloning of a second gene
and evidence for the existence of a third isoform. Gene 82, 289-280.
Karn, J., Brenner, S., and Barnett, L. (1983). Protein structural domains
in Caenorhabditis elegans uric-54 myosin heavy chain gene are not
separated by introns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80, 4253-4257.
Kurabayashi, M.. Tsuchimochi, H., Komuro, I., Takaku, R., and Tazaki,
Y. (1988). Molecular cloning and characterization of human cardiac
a- and b-form myosin heavy chain complementary DNA clones. J. Clin.
Invest. 82, 524-531.
Lichter, I?, Umeda, I? K., Levin, J. E., and Vosberg H.-P (1986). Partial
characterization of the human 8-myosin heavy-chain gene which is expressed in heart and skeletal muscle. Eur. J. Biochem. 760, 419-428.
Liew, C.-C., Sole, M. J., Yamauchi-Takihara, K.. Kellam, B., Anderson,
D. H., Lin, L., and Liew, J. C. (1990). Complete sequence and organization of the human cardiac 5-myosin heavy chain gene. Nucl. Acids
Res. 78, 3847-3651.
Matsuoka, R., Yoshida, M. C., Kanda, N., Kimura, M., Ozasa, H., and
Takao, A. (1989). Human cardiac myosin heavy chain gene mapped
within chromosome
region 14q11.2-q13. Am. J. Med. Genet. 32,
279-284.

Cell

1006

McKusick,V. A. (1966).Mendelian Inheritance in Man: Catalogs of Autosomal Dominant, Autosomal Recessive, and X-Linked Phenotypes
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press), p. xi.
McNally, E. M., Kraft, Ft., Bravo-Zehnder, M., Taylor, D. A., and Leinwand, L. A. (1969). Full-length rat alpha and beta cardiac myosin
heavy chain sequences. J. Mol. Biol. 210, 665-671.
Mercadier. J. J., Bouveret, f?, Gorza, I., Schiaffino, S., Clark, W. A.,
Zak, R., Swinghedauw. B., and Schwartz, K. (1963). Myosin isoenzymes in normal and hypertrophied human ventricular myocardium.
Circ. Res. 53, 52-62.
Molina, M. I., Kropp, K. E., Gulick, J., and Robbins, J. (1967). The sequence of an embryonic myosin heavy chain gene and isolation of its
corresponding cDNA. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 6476-6466.
Rozek, C. E., and Davidson, N. (1966). Differential processing of RNA
transcribed from the single-copy Drosophila myosin heavy chain gene
produces four mRNAs that encode two polypeptides. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 83, 2126-2132.
Saez, L. J., and Leinwand, L. A. (1986). Characterization of diverse
forms of myosin heavy chain expressed in adult human skeletal muscle. Nucl. Acids Res. 74, 2951-2969.
Saez, L. J., Gianola, K. M., McNally, E. M., Feghali, R., Eddy, R.,
Shows, T. B., and Leinwand, L. A. (1967). Human cardiac myosin
heavy chain genes and their linkage in the genome. Nucl. Acids Res.
15, 5443-5459.
Sanger, F, Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. R. (1977). DNA sequencing
with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74,
5463-5467.
Shohet, R. V., Conti, M. A., Kawamoto, S., Preston, Y. A., Brill, D. A.,
and Adelstein, R. S. (1969). Cloning of the cDNA encoding the myosin
heavy chain of a vertebrate cellular myosin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
86, 7726-7730.
Solomon, S. D., Geisterfer-Lowrance, A. A. T., Vosberg, H.-P, Hiller,
G., Jarcho, J. A., Morton, C. C., McBride, W. O., Mitchell, A. L., Bale,
A. E., McKenna, W. J.. Seidman, J. G., and Seidman, C. E. (199Oa).A
locus for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is closely linked to the
cardiac myosin heavy chain genes, CRI-L436, and CRI-L329 on chromosome 14 at qll-q12. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47, 369-394.
Solomon, S. D., Jarcho, J. A., McKenna, W., Geisterfer-Lowrance,
A. A. T., Germain, R., Salerni, R., Seidman, J. G., and Seidman, C. E.
(1990b). Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetically heterogeneous disease. J. Clin. Invest. 86, 993-999.
Southern, E. M. (1975). Detection of specific sequences among DNA
fragments separated by gel electrophoresis. J. Mol. Biol. 98, 503-517.
Stedman, H. H., Eller, M., Jullian, E. H., Fertels, S. H., Sarkar, S., Sylvester, J. E., Kelly,A. M., and Rubinstein, N. A. (1990). The human embryonic myosin heavy chain. Complete primary structure reveals
evolutionary relationships with other developmental isoforms. J. Biol.
Chem. 265, 3566-3576.
Strehler, E. E., Strehler-Page, M.-A., Perriard, J.-C., Periasamy, M., and
Nadal-Ginard, B. (1966).Complete nucleotide and encoded amino acid
sequences of a mammalian myosin heavy chain gene. J. Mol. Biol.
190, 291-317.
Tanigawa, G., Jarcho, J. A., Kass, S., Solomon, S. D., Vosberg, H.-P,
Seidman, J. G., and Seidman, C. E. (1990). A molecular basis for
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a cardiac a/5 myosin heavy
chain hybrid gene. Cell 62, this issue.
Tong, S. W., and Elzinga, M. (1990). Amino acid sequence of rabbit
skeletal muscle myosin. 50-kDa fragment of the heavy chain. J. Biol.
Chem. 285,4693-4901.
Yamauchi-Takihara,K., Sole, M. J., Liew, J., Ing, D., and Liew, C.-C.
(1969). Characterization of human cardiac myosin heavy chain genes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 3504-3506.
Yanagisawa, M., Hamada, Y., Katsuragawa, Y., Imamura, M., Mikawa,
T, and Masaki, T (1967). Complete primary structure of vertebrate
smooth muscle myosin heavy chain deduced from its complementary
DNA sequence; implications of topography and function of myosin. J.
Mol. Biol. 198. 143-157.

