Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48:412-419, 1991

Tay-Sachs Disease in Moroccan Jews: Deletion of a Phenylalanine
in the a-Subunit of P-Hexosaminidase
Ruth Navon*,t and Richard L. Proia*
*Genetics and Biochemistry Branch, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD;
and tHuman Genetics Department, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, and Molecular Genetics Unit, Sapir Medical Center,
Kfar-Sava, Israel

Summary
Tay-Sachs disease is an inherited lysosomal storage disorder caused by defects in the 0-hexosaminidase
a-subunit gene. The carrier frequency for Tay-Sachs disease is significantly elevated in both the Ashkenazi
Jewish and Moroccan Jewish populations but not in other Jewish groups. We have found that the mutations
underlying Tay-Sachs disease in Ashkenazi and Moroccan Jews are different. Analysis of a Moroccan Jewish
Tay-Sachs patient has revealed an in-frame deletion (AF) of one of the two adjacent phenylalanine codons
that are present at positions 304 and 305 in the a-subunit sequence. The mutation impairs the subunit
assembly of 0-hexosaminidase A, resulting in an absence of enzyme activity. The Moroccan patient was found
also to carry, in the other a-subunit allele, a different, and as yet unidentified, mutation which causes a
deficit of mRNA. Analysis of obligate carriers from six unrelated Moroccan Jewish families showed that three
harbor the AF mutation, raising the possibility that this defect may be a prevalent mutation in this ethnic
group.

Introduction

Tay-Sachs disease is an autosomal recessive disorder
caused by an absence of the lysosomal enzyme, P-hexosaminidase A (reviewed by Neufeld [1989] and Sandhoff et al. [1989]). The enzyme, a heterodimer composed of noncovalently associated a- and 13-subunits,
acts on a variety of substrates containing terminal
N-acetylglucosaminides and N-acetylgalatosaminides,
including GM2 ganglioside. In Tay-Sachs disease, mutations in the a-subunit gene cause the enzyme deficiency, and, as a consequence, undegraded GM2 ganglioside accumulates in lysosomes. This process is
particularly injurious to neurons and leads to nervous
system deterioration. In affected individuals, mental
and motor impairment begins in the first year of life
and progresses rapidly, with death ensuing in early
childhood.
Received August 17, 1990; revision received October 10, 1990.
Address for correspondence and reprints: Dr. Richard L. Proia,
Building 10, Room 9D-15, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892.

This material is in the public domain, and no copyright is
claimed.

412

Among the general population the Tay-Sachs disease carrier frequency, calculated from the incidence
of the disease, is estimated to be 1/300 (Sandhoff et
al. 1989). This frequency is elevated among certain
ethnic groups. The most well-known example is the
Ashkenazi Jewish population, in which rv3 % (1 /3 1)
of the population carry an a-subunit mutation. The
major mutation, a 4-bp insertion in exon 11 of the
a-subunit gene, accounts for rv70% of the mutant
alleles. Most of the remaining Tay-Sachs alleles in the
population contain a splice-junction mutation at the
5' end of intron 12 (Arpaia et al. 1988; Myerowitz
1988; Myerowitz and Costigan 1988; Ohno and Suzuki 1988; Paw et al. 1990; Triggs-Raine et al. 1990).
A second well-characterized group with an increased
incidence of Tay-Sachs disease is within the FrenchCanadian population in eastern Canada, where the
carrier frequency is similar to that in the Ashkenazi
population (Andermann et al. 1977). In the FrenchCanadian isolate, as with Ashkenazi Jews, one particular mutation predominates, in this case a 7.6-kb deletion at the 5' end of the a-subunit gene (Myerowitz
and Hogikyan 1987; Hectman et al. 1989).
It has been established that Moroccan Jews, a sub-

Tay-Sachs Mutation in Moroccan Jews
group of Sephardic Jews, also have an elevated carrier
frequency, estimated to be 'v1 /60, for Tay-Sachs disease (Vecht et al. 1983; R. Navon and E. Ackstein,
unpublished data). The high carrier frequency in Ashkenazi and Moroccan Jews does not extend to other
Jewish populations. Evidence has been presented suggesting that the Ashkenazi and Moroccan mutations
may be distinct (Bach et al. 1976).
In the present study we demonstrate that the molecular defects that cause Tay-Sachs disease in Ashkenazi
and Moroccan Jews are different. Analysis of a Moroccan Jewish Tay-Sachs patient has demonstrated an
in-frame phenylalanine codon deletion (AF) in the
a-subunit gene. The mutation impairs the folding and
assembly of the a-subunit, resulting in an absence of
enzyme activity. The Moroccan patient was also
found to carry, in the other allele, a different, and as
yet unidentified, mutation, which causes a deficit of
mRNA. Analysis of Tay-Sachs disease obligate carriers from six unrelated Moroccan Jewish families revealed that three carry the AF mutation.
Experimental Procedures
Reagents

Tissue culture medium and reagents were from Biofluids (Rockville, MD). Immuno-Precipitin was from
Bethesda Research Laboratories. Enlightening was
from Amersham [35S]Methionine (1,000 Ci/mmol),
[32P]ATP (3,000 Ci/mmol), and GeneScreenPlus membranes were from New England Nuclear. The reagents
for the PCR technique were from Perkin Elmer-Cetus.
Reagents for DNA sequencing were from U.S. Biochemicals. Low-melting-temperature agarose (SeaPlaque) was from FMC BioProducts (Rockland, ME).
DEAE-dextran was from Pharmacia. AMV reverse
transcriptase and oligo(dT)1s were from Promega. Restriction enzymes, DNA ligase, and T4 DNA kinase
were from New England Biolabs. T4 DNA polymerase was from Bio-Rad. 4-Methylumbelliferyl-6-sulfo-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranoside was from
Toronto Research Chemicals.
Moroccan Patient and Carriers

The Moroccan Jewish Tay-Sachs patient was born
in Israel. Both parents were born in Morocco - the
father (MD) in Rabat, the mother (AD) in Casablanca.
The patient had classical signs of infantile Tay-Sachs
disease, and the diagnosis was confirmed by a deficiency of 1-hexosaminidase A in her serum, leukocytes, and skin fibroblasts.

413

All of the Moroccan Jewish carriers were obligate
heterozygotes for Tay-Sachs disease. The carriers
were found to have heterozygote levels of 1-hexosaminidase A, both in serum and in leukocyte samples.
All were born in Morocco - SiM in Rabat, SY and SM
in Marrakech, AR and HA in Casablanca, and AM in
Fez. MD and SiM are first cousins, as are SY and SM.
Cell Culture

Normal human fetal lung fibroblasts, IMR-90, were
obtained from the Human Genetic Mutant Cell Repository (Camden, NJ). A skin fibroblast culture was
derived from the Moroccan Jewish patient with TaySachs disease. COS 1 cells were obtained from the
American Type Tissue Culture Collection. Cells were
cultured at 37PC in 5% CO2 in Dulbecco's modified
Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 25 mM
HEPES, 10% FBS, and antibiotics (growth medium).
Fibroblast Labeling and Immunoprecipitation
Human fibroblast cultures in 100-mm dishes were
labeled with 400 gCi of [35S]methionine in 5 ml
DMEM (formulated without methionine) containing
5% dialyzed FBS. After 16 h the medium was collected, and the cells were rinsed twice with PBS. The
cell monolayers were incubated with PBS containing
1% Nonidet P-40 and 10 mg BSA/ml for 15 min at
room temperature. The resulting cell extract and medium samples were preabsorbed with 100 jl of
Immuno-Precipitin. To determine the association
state of the a-subunit, the samples were divided in half
and were first immunoprecipitated with 3 il of either
anti-,B-hexosaminidase A, which recognizes all forms
of the a-subunit, or anti-hexosaminidase B, which will
precipitate only a-subunits that are associated with

1-subunits (Proia et al. 1984). After incubation for
2 h, 40 gl of Immuno-Precipitin was added, and the
immune complexes were collected by centrifugation.
The precipitate was washed twice with PBS containing
0. 1% Nonidet P-40. The labeled proteins were solubilized by heating at 95°C for 5 min in 100 pl of PBS
containing 1% SDS and 10 mM DTT. The ImmunoPrecipitin was removed by centrifugation, and 0.9 ml
of PBS containing 2% Nonidet P-40, 10 mg BSA/ml,
and 10 mM iodoacetamide was added to the supernatant. The samples were preabsorbed with ImmunoPrecipitin as before and then incubated overnight at
40C with 3 ml of anti-denatured a-subunit serum.
After incubation with 40 pl of Immuno-Precipitin, the
immune complexes were washed three times with a
buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.6 M NaCl,

Navon and Proia

414

0.05% Nonidet P-40, and 0.1% SDS, pH 8.6. The
labeled proteins were solubilized in sample buffer (1 %
SDS, 0.125 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, and 10% glycerol),
were reduced with 10 mM DTT, and were electrophoresed on 8%-16% gradient gels in the presence of
SDS. The gels were saturated with Enlightening, were
dried, and were exposed to Kodak X-Omat AR film
at 700C.
Site-directed Mutagenesis

Introduction of the AF mutation into the a-subunit
was accomplished by site-directed mutagenesis according to a method described elsewhere (Kunkel et
al. 1987) by using single-stranded M13 containing the
a-subunit (Navon and Proia 1989) and the mutagenic
oligonucleotide (antisense), 5' GCT GAC TTC TAA
GAA TGT GCT CAT GAA CTC 3'.
Cell Transfections

The normal a-subunit cDNA and the a-subunit
with the AF mutation were cloned into the expression
vector, pSVL, and were transfected into COS 1 cells
according to a method described elsewhere (Navon
and Proia 1989). Cell extracts were assayed for 13-hexosaminidase activity by 4-methylumbelliferyl-6-sulfo2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranoside according to a
method described elsewhere (Navon and Proia 1989).
Mutation Detection by DNA Sequence Analysis

Total RNA was prepared from human fibroblast
cultures by the guanidine isothiocyanate/CsCl method
(Chirgwin et al. 1979), and the polyA+ fraction was
isolated using an oligo(dT)-cellulose column (Aviv
and Leder 1972). The polyA + RNA (2 ig) was reverse
transcribed using AMV reverse transcriptase and
oligo(dT)ls. Segments of the a-subunit were amplified
by the PCR technique (Saiki et al. 1988) using Taq
DNA polymerase and a-subunit-specific oligonucleotide primers which contained an additional EcoRI sequence at their 5' end. The DNA was subjected to
amplification on a Perkin Elmer -Cetus thermocycler
for 39 cycles. Each cycle was 2 min at 940C for denaturation, 3 min at 600C for annealing, and 6 min at
720C for primer extension. The amplified segments
were cleaved with EcoRI and isolated from a lowmelting-temperature agarose gel and were ligated into
the EcoRI site of the M13mpl8 vector. From the recombinant clones, single-stranded DNA was isolated
and sequenced by the dideoxy-chain termination method (Sanger et al. 1977) using Sequenase.
Direct sequencing of DNA derived from asymmetric

PCR amplification was accomplished according to a
method described elsewhere (Kadowaki et al. 1990).
The first amplification was accomplished using 5'
GCA GGT GAA ATC AAC CTC ATC TCC TCC
(primer 1) and 5'ACT CCT GGA TTA CTG ACT
CCT TGC TAC (primer 2). A portion of the first
reaction was subjected to asymmetric amplification
using only primer 1. Sequencing was performed using
a [32p] end-labeled internal primer, 5'TGC TAC TCT
GGG TCT GAG CCC.
Mutation Detection by Hybridization with Allele-specific
Oligonucleotide Probes

For detection of the AF mutation, cDNA prepared
as described above, or genomic DNA was amplified
using primer 1 and primer 2. The DNA was subjected
to amplification on a Perkin-Elmer Cetus thermocycler for 39 cycles. Each cycle was 2 min at 940C for
denaturation, 2.5 min at 600C for annealing and 3 min
at 720C for synthesis. The Ashkenazi infantile TaySachs mutations were amplified according to a method
described elsewhere (Myerowitz 1988; Myerowitz
and Costigan 1988). The conditions for mutation detection by dot blotting and hybridization were as described elsewhere (Navon and Proia 1989). The sequence of the oligonucleotide probe specific for the
AF mutation was 5'ATG AGC ACA TTC TTA GAA
GTC. The sequence of the corresponding normal
probe was 5'AGC ACA TTC TTC TTA GAA GTC.
The sequences of the probes for detection of the Ashkenazi infantile mutations were as described elsewhere
(Myerowitz 1988; Myerowitz and Costigan 1988).
Results

Control IMR-90 fibroblasts and a fibroblast culture
derived from a Moroccan patient with Tay-Sachs disease were labeled with [35S]methionine for 16 h, and
the cell extracts and medium were immunoprecipitated with antiserum prepared against either hexosaminidase A, which precipitates all forms of the
a-subunit (total), or anti-hexosaminidase B, which
precipitates only a-subunits associated with 1B-subunits (associated) (Proia et al. 1984). In contrast to
the IMR-90 fibroblast extracts, which contained both
precursor and mature a-subunits, the extracts from
the Moroccan Tay-Sachs fibroblasts contained only
precursor a-subunits (fig. 1). The a-subunits synthesized by the Tay-Sachs fibroblast culture were not immunoprecipitated by antibodies against the 1-subunits
(associated), demonstrating that the a-subunits pro-

Tay-Sachs Mutation in Moroccan Jews

IMR-90SAHS

IMR-90

415

oS

Ser309
ValI

C
G

306

T
G

A
G

Leu36

T

Phe3W

T
TC

Phe34
Precursor N..
Mature -

Thr303

Moroccan

IA

T

Tay-Sachs
A G C T AG C T

G

Val30

A GIuW6
G
A
305
T Leu
T

_

T
A

Phe304

C

Ser302

Phe 300 T

duced by these cells were not competent for assembly
with 3-subunits.
The cell-labeling experiment demonstrated that
a-subunit protein was produced by these cells. As expected, northern analysis revealed easily detectable
a-subunit mRNA in the Moroccan Tay-Sachs fibroblasts (not shown). To identify the mutation carried
by the Moroccan patient, mRNA was isolated from
the fibroblast culture and was reverse transcribed into
cDNA, and portions of the a-subunit cDNA were amplified by the PCR technique and were cloned and
sequenced. This analysis revealed a deletion of one of
the two adjacent phenylalanine codons (TTC) that
are present at positions 304 and 305 in the normal
a-subunit sequence (Myerowitz et al. 1985) (fig. 2).
To verify the result, genomic DNA was amplified in
the region of the mutation, and the amplified material

Normal

iCA Thr303

Met301 T |

Figure I
Synthesis and assembly of a-subunit in normal and
Moroccan Tay-Sachs fibroblasts. Fibroblast cultures in 100-mm
dishes were labeled with 400 pCi [35S]methionine for 16 h. Cell
extracts and medium samples were divided in half and immunoprecipitated with either anti-hexosaminidase A (total) or anti-hexosaminidase B (associated). The immune precipitates were solubilized and then reimmunoprecipitated with anti-denatured a-subunit
serum.

G SerA

T

G

MEDIUM

30
Ser~

T
A
AC

G
Ser302 AJ

CELLS

C
T

A

A

Glu307

T

k

A
G
T

A

30
Met30

T Phe~

T

Figure 2
Nucleotide sequences of a-chain cDNA from Moroccan patient with Tay-Sachs disease. A portion of an autoradiograph is shown for the sequencing gel of the normal cDNA and of
the Moroccan Tay-Sachs patient's cDNA. The two adjacent TTC
codons in the normal sequence and the single TTC codon in the
mutant sequence are indicated.

was sequenced directly (fig. 3). The resulting ladder
demonstrated the sequence containing phenylalanine
deletion (AF) superimposed on a normal sequence
(N). Thus, the patient carries two different a-subunit
alleles -one with the AF mutation and the other with
a normal sequence in this region.
The AF mutation was introduced into the normal
a-subunit cDNA by oligonucleotide-mediated sitedirected mutagenesis. The normal and the mutated
cDNAs were expressed in COS 1 cells under the control of the SV40 early promoter. As shown in table 1,
the AF mutation rendered the a-subunit enzymatically
inactive. In the transfected COS 1 cells the a-subunit
carrying the AF mutation was found only as precursor
in the cells, with none secreted into the medium (fig.
4), a finding similar to results obtained with the Moroccan Tay-Sachs fibroblast culture.
Genomic DNA from Moroccan Jewish individuals
who were obligate carriers for Tay-Sachs disease were
tested for the presence of the AF mutation. The region
of the mutation was amplified by the PCR technique,

N

N AF

G

CT
G C
A T

A
c

Normal

T
G I
A AGCT

Moroccan
Tay-Sachs

AGCT

T G
0 G A
A C
A T

G

GG

A
T
T

A A
T A
T G
A
T
T

C

C

T

T

T

T

C
T

C

C

T

T
T

T
T

A

AA

A

C
G
Al

Expression of a-Chain-associated P-Hexosaminidase
Activity in Transfected COS I Cells

P-HEXOSAMINIDASE ACTIVITY

c c

A

C

|lAnd¢9-'~E$R.:

Navon and Proia

416

(unitsa/mg protein)
Experiment 1
Experiment 2

DNA

pSVLa ...................
pSVLaAF ....................
Mock transfection

.............

the AF mutation. Because MD and SiM as well as SY
and SM are first cousins, the AF mutation was found in
three of the six unrelated families carrying a Tay-Sachs
mutation. Genomic DNA from 10 normal Moroccan
Jews was negative for the mutation. The patient and

0

Precursor%,
Maturel

and the product was blotted onto duplicate hybridization membranes. The samples were hybridized with
allele-specific oligonucleotide probes to detect either
the sequence containing the AF mutation or the corresponding normal sequence (fig. 5). Amplified genomic
DNA of the Moroccan patient and the father (MD)
were positive for the mutation in this assay. The
mother (AD) tested negative for the AF mutation and,
therefore, must be carrying the other, as yet unknown,
mutation. The Moroccan patient's DNA hybridized
with the normal probe, which was expected because
of compound heterozygosity. In total, five of eight
Moroccan Jewish obligate carriers were positive for

4.1

NOTE. -COS 1 cells were transfected with pSVLa or pSVLaAF
or were mock transfected. After 48 h the cell extracts were assayed
with 4-methylumbelliferyl-6-sulfo-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranoside.
a Defined as the activity that releases 1 nmol of 4-methylumbelliferone/min.

CC
AA
CC
GG
zA A

Direct sequencing of PCR products derived from
Figure 3
genomic DNA. Genomic DNA from a normal individual and from
a Moroccan Tay-Sachs patient was subjected to asymmetric PCR
amplification in the region of the AF mutation, and the products
were sequenced. A portion of the autoradiograph is shown for the
sequencing gel of the normal cDNA and of the Moroccan patient's
DNA. The normal (N) and the mutant (AF) sequences are displayed.

44.5
2.7
4.3

47.3
3.1

0

i

l

CELLS MEDIUM
Figure 4

Expression of a-subunit carrying AF mutation in
COS 1 cells. COS 1 cells were transfected with pSVL carrying the
wild-type a-subunit or the a-subunit containing the AF mutation
or were mock transfected. After 48 h the cells were labeled with
[35S]methionine for 16 h, and cell extracts and medium samples
were immunoprecipitated with anti-hexosaminidase A.

417

Tay-Sachs Mutation in Moroccan Jews
a

Hi

z

Moroccan Carriers

5 An MD SiM SY SM AR

AM NA

Normal
Probe
AF
..

Probe

Figure 5
Identification of AF mutation in Moroccan carriPCR-amplified genomic DNA from a clinically normal individual, the Moroccan Jewish Tay-Sachs patient, the patient's mother
(AD) and father (MD), and six other obligate Moroccan Jewish
carriers was assayed for the presence of the AF mutation. The DNA
samples were hybridized with an allele-specific oligonudeotide probe
specific for the AF mutation (AF Probe) and with an oligonucleotide
specific for the corresponding normal region (Normal Probe).

derived from the Moroccan patient's cDNA. Hybridization with the probe carrying the normal sequence,
which should hybridize to sequences expressed from
the unknown mutant allele, demonstrated a low level
of expression, compared with that in normal fibroblasts. No signal was detected by direct amplification
of mRNA done without reverse transcription, ruling
out contamination with genomic DNA.

ers.

the carriers did not carry either of the two Ashkenazi
mutations-the splice-junction mutation or the 4-bp
insertion (not shown).
We next determined whether RNA expressed from
the other mutant allele carried by the patient could be
detected. PolyA+ RNA from the Moroccan patient
and from normal fibroblasts was reverse transcribed,
and the region surrounding the AF mutation was amplified by PCR. Equal amounts of the amplified DNA
were hybridized with allele-specific oligonucleotide
probes (fig. 6). As expected, the probe specific for
the AF mutation hybridized only to the PCR product

I~~~~~~

'T

2

NORMAL

E

sE

I

_

PROBE
Figure 6
Allele-specific expression of mRNA in fibroblasts
from Moroccan Tay-Sachs patient. The samples indicated on the
top of the figure were subjected to amplification by PCR in the
region of the AF mutation. Equal amounts of the indicated samples
were dot blotted and hybridized with an allele-specific oligonucleotide probe specific for the AF mutation (AF Probe) and with an
oligonucleotide specific for the corresponding normal region (Normal Probe).

Discussion

The Moroccan Jewish Tay-Sachs patient that we
have described carries two different Tay-Sachs alleles.
In one allele a 3-bp deletion results in the in-frame
removal of one of the two successive phenylalanine
codons that occur at positions 304 and 305 in the
normal a-subunit sequence. The other allele contains
an as yet unidentified mutation. We found that this
unidentified mutation caused a significant decrease in
the amount of a-subunit mRNA, suggesting a defect
in transcription or mRNA stability. The unidentified
mutation in both the Moroccan patient and obligate
heterozygotes was not one of the two Ashkenazi infantile mutations. Different a-subunit mutations in the
Ashkenazi and Moroccan Jewish populations are consistent with the hypothesis that Tay-Sachs disease
mutations originated and expanded in the Ashkenazi
Jewish population after the migration of their predecessors to Europe (Myrianthopoulos and Aronson
1966; Petersen et al. 1983).
The AF mutation occurred in the context of a stretch
of pyrimidines, TTC TTC TT, containing direct trinucleotide repeats. The deletion of a short direct repeat is consistent with a "slipped mispairing" model in
which strand slippage and mispairing during DNA
replication causes a loop out of a repeat sequence
which is subsequently excised (Farabaugh and Miller
1978; Efstatiadis et al. 1980).
The fibroblast culture derived from the Moroccan
patient synthesized an a-subunit that is unable to assemble with the 5-subunit to form I-hexosaminidase
A. Although the patient is a compound heterozygote,
all or most of the a-subunit protein detected in the
fibroblasts is likely to be derived from the AF allele
because expression of transcript from the other allele is
severely depressed. Also, the AF protein, in precursor
form, is relatively stable as determined from the transfection experiment, arguing against the possibility that
the AF protein might be rapidly degraded -and thus
undetectable - in the patient's fibroblasts. It cannot be
determined at this time whether the mutation induces

418

a global alteration in the folding of the a-subunit or
whether this change has a more direct effect on the
assembly process. The two adjacent phenylalanines at
positions 304 and 305 in the human a-subunit are
conserved in the homologous human and mouse 13-subunits (Myerowitz et al. 1985; Korneluk et al. 1986;
Bapat et al. 1988; Proia 1988), suggesting that this
region may be important for folding or attainment of
the final enzyme structure. It is interesting that in the
mouse a-subunit (S. Yamanaka and R. L. Proia, unpublished data) and in the single Dictyostelium hexosaminidase gene (Graham et al. 1988) the second phenylalanine is conserved, with the first being replaced
by a leucine.
Among Ashkenazi Jews, three a-subunit mutations
account for nearly all of the alleles that cause TaySachs disease and its milder variant, adult GM2 gangliosidosis (Neufeld 1989). It has been suggested that a
DNA-based assay, because of its high specificity and
ability to distinguish between the adult and infantile
disorders, may be very useful when used in conjunction with enzyme screening for Tay-Sachs disease carriers among Ashkenazi Jews (Paw et al. 1990; TriggsRaine et al. 1990). The finding that the AF mutation
was carried by three of six unrelated Moroccan Jewish
families harboring a Tay-Sachs allele raises the possibility that this may be a prevalent mutation among
this population. At the present time there are 500,000
Moroccan Jews and 1,500,000 Ashkenazi Jews living
in Israel, with significant intermarriage between the
populations (Vecht et al. 1983). DNA-based testing
of enzymatically identified carriers among Israeli Jews
should include the AF mutation, as well as the three
Ashkenazi mutations. In addition, it is important that
the other Moroccan mutation(s) be identified for incorporation into the DNA-based testing.

Acknowledgments
We thank J. Zlotogora for the patient's fibroblasts, B.
Porter for help in obtaining blood samples from the Moroccan carriers, and George Poy for oligonucleotide synthesis.
We thank Dan Camerini-Otereo, Jerri Anne Boose, Debra
Boles, Peggy Hsieh, and Cyndi Tifft for careful reading of
the manuscript. We also thank L. Taylor for secretarial
assistance. This work was supported in part by grant 260/
89 to R.N. from the Basic Research Foundation administered by the Israeli Academy of Sciences and Humanities.

References
Andermann E, Scriver CR, Wolfe LS, Dansky L, Ander-

Navon and Proia
mann F (1977) Genetic variants of Tay-Sachs disease:
Tay-Sachs disease and Sandhoff's disease in French Canadians, juvenile Tay-Sachs disease in Lebanese Canadians,
and a Tay-Sachs screening program in the French Canadian population. Prog Clin Biol Res 18:161-188
Arpaia E, Dumbrille-Ross A, Maler T, Neote K, Tropak M,
Troxel C, Stirling JL, et al (1988) Identification of an
altered splice site in Ashkenazi Tay-Sachs disease. Nature
333:85-86
Aviv H. Leder P (1972) Purification of biologically active
globin messenger RNA by chromatography on oligothymidylic acid-cellulose. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 69:14081412
Bach G, Navon R, Zeigler M, Beyth Y, Porter B, Cohen MM
(1976) Tay-Sachs disease in a Moroccan Jewish family: a
possible new mutation. Isr J Med Sci 12:1432-1439
Bapat B, Ethier M, Neote K, Mahuran D, Gravel RA (1988)
Cloning and sequence analysis of a cDNA encoding the
1-subunit of mouse 13-hexosaminidase. FEBS Lett 237:
191-195
Chirgwin JM, Przybyla AE, MacDonald RJ, Rutter WE
(1979) Isolation of biologically active ribonucleic acid
from sources enriched in ribonuclease. Biochemistry 18:
5294-5299
Efstratiadis A, Posakony JW, Maniatis T, Lawn RM,
O'Connell C, Spritz RA, DeRiel JK, et al (1990) The
structure and evolution of the human 13-globin gene family. Cell 21:653-668
Farabaugh PJ, Miller JH (1978) Genetic studies of the lac
repressor. VII. On the molecular nature of spontaneous
hotspots in the lad gene of Escherichia coli. J Mol Biol
126:847-863
Graham TR, Zassenhaus HP, Kaplan A (1988) Molecular
cloning of the cDNA which encodes the O-N-acetylhexosaminidase A from Dictyostelium discoideum. J Biol
Chem 263:16823-16829
Hechtman P, Boulay B, Bayleran J, Kaplan F (1989) DNA
diagnosis of Tay-Sachs disease: PCR amplification for detection of the French Canadian deletion allele. Am J Hum
Genet 45 [Suppl]: A193
Kadowaki T, Kadowaki H. Taylor SI (1990) A nonsense
mutation causing decreased levels of insulin receptor
mRNA: detection by a simplified technique for direct sequencing of genomic DNA amplified by the polymerase
chain reaction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:658-662
Korneluk RG, Mahuran DJ, Noete K, Klavins MH, O'Dowd
BF, Tropak M, Willard HF, et al (1986) Isolation of cDNA

clones coding for the a-subunit of human 0-hexosaminidase:

extensive homology between the a- and 1-subunits and studies on Tay-Sachs disease. J Biol Chem 261:8407-8413
Kunkel TA, Roberts JD, Zakour A (1987) Rapid and efficient site-specific mutagenesis without phenotypic selection. Methods Enzymol 154:367-382
Myerowitz R (1988) Splice junction mutation in some Ashkenazi Jews with Tay-Sachs disease: evidence against a
single defect within this ethnic group. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 85:3955-3959

Tay-Sachs Mutation in Moroccan Jews
Myerowitz R, Costigan FC (1988) The major defect in Ashkenazi Jews with Tay-Sachs disease is an insertion in the
gene for the a-chain of P-hexosaminidase. J Biol Chem
263:18587-18589
Myerowitz R, Hogikyan ND (1987) A deletion involving
Alu sequences in the 0-hexosaminidase gene of French
Canadians with Tay-Sachs disease. J Biol Chem 262:
15396-15399
Myerowitz R, Piekarz R, Neufeld EF, Shows TB, Suzuki K
(1985) Human IB-hexosaminidase a chain: coding sequence and homology with the , chain. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 82:7830-7834
Myrianthopoulos NC, Aronson SM (1966) Population dynamics of Tay-Sachs disease. I. Reproductive fitness and
selection. Am J Hum Genet 18:313-327
Navon R, Proia RL (1989) The mutations in Ashkenazi
Jews with adult GM2 gangliosidosis, the adult form of
Tay-Sachs disease. Science 243:1471-1474
Neufeld EF, (1989) Natural history and inherited disorders
of a lysosomal enzyme, 0-hexosaminidase. J Biol Chem
264:10927-10930
Ohno K, Suzuki K (1988) A splicing defect due to an exonintron junctional mutation results in abnormal n-hexosaminidase a-chain mRNAs in Ashkenazi Jewish patients with Tay-Sachs disease. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 153:463-469
Paw BH, Tieu PT, Kaback MM, Lim J, Neufeld EF (1990)
Frequency of three HEX A mutant alleles among Jewish
and non-Jewish carriers identified in a Tay-Sachs screening program. Am J Hum Genet 47:698-705
Petersen GM, Rotter JI, Cantor RM, Field LL, Greenwald

419
S, Lim JST, Roy C, et al (1983) The Tay-Sachs disease
gene in North American Jewish populations: geographic
variations and origins. Am J Hum Genet 35:1258-1269
Proia RL (1988) The gene encoding the human 0-hexosaminidase D-chain: extensive homology of intron positions in the a- and 3-chain genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
85:1883-1887
Proia RL, D'Azzo A, Neufeld EF (1984) Association of
a- and 1-subunits during the biosynthesis of 1-hexosaminidase in cultured human fibroblasts. J Biol Chem 259:
3350-3354
Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S, Scharf SJ, Higuchi R, Horn
GT, Mullis KB, et al (1988) Primer-directed enzymatic
amplification of DNA with a thermostable DNA polymerase. Science 239:487-491
Sandhoff K, Conzelmann E, Neufeld EF, Kaback MM, Suzuki K (1989) The GM2 gangliosidoses. In: Scriver CR,
Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D (eds) The metabolic basis
of inherited disease, 6th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, pp
1807-1842
Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR (1977) DNA sequencing
with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 74:5463-5467
Triggs-Raine BL, Feigenbaum ASJ, Natowitz M, Skormorowski M-A, Schuster SM, Clarke JTR, Mahuran DJ, et al
(1990) Screening for carriers of Tay-Sachs disease among
Ashkenazi Jews: a comparison of DNA-based and
enzyme-based tests. N Engl J Med 323:6-12
Vecht J, Zeigler M, Segal M, Bach G (1983) Tay-Sachs
disease among Moroccan Jews. Isr J Med Sci 19:67-69

